Solid earnings season wasn't enough to calm investors

London (CNN Business)Corporate earnings season was supposed to turn around Wall Street's sour mood. In the end, it wasn't much of a diversion.
What's happening: Most results for the end of 2021 have been posted. On the whole, they looked solid. But that wasn't enough to calm nervy investors, who are stressing out about inflation, the Federal Reserve and a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine that could disrupt energy supplies.
"The market just feels like it wants to go down," David Coombs, head of multi-asset investments at Rathbones, told me.
The CNN Business Fear & Greed Index, which tracks market sentiment, remains stuck in "fear" territory. One month ago, it was producing a "greed" reading.
Quick rewind: Earnings growth for S&P 500 companies is tracking at 28% for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared with the same period in 2020, according to The Earnings Scout. That's well above the three-year average. Almost 85% of companies in the index have reported results.
But investors have largely brushed off these gains and are instead latching on to uncertainty about the future.
"We're strapped in for another two or three months — right through to next earnings season, to be honest," Coombs said.
His thought bubble: For the moment, it's all about the inflation data and the Federal Reserve.
At this point, most investors agree that the Fed is behind the curve on fighting inflation and expect the central bank to forcefully intervene when it meets next month. But exactly how far policymakers will go remains up for debate.
David Bianco, DWS chief investment officer for the Americas, said his biggest concern, now that earnings season is wrapping up, is whether a sell-off in government bonds will gather steam, disrupting the broader market.
"What I'm really fearful of is the bond market losing confidence in the Fed's ability to tame inflation and bring it down over a reasonable amount of time," Bianco said.
Bond yields move conversely to prices. So if investors start dumping 10-year US Treasuries and yields spike, it would make stocks look less attractive and ramp up selling pressure.
Then there's the situation on the Ukrainian border. While investors have in recent years tended to brush off geopolitics, that's changed in recent weeks.
According to Coombs, if tensions between Russia and Ukraine had been building "18 months ago or two years ago, it probably would have been largely ignored." Instead, it's another reason for pessimism — especially because of Russia's influential role as an oil and gas supplier.
The run-up in energy prices has been a major contributor to expectations for inflation, which the Fed is watching closely.
"It complicates their calculus," Bianco said.
Get ready for the Fed's favorite measure of inflation
It's clear by now that inflation ran red-hot in January. Consumer prices, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, rose 7.5% year-over-year — the fastest increase in four decades. Producer prices leaped 9.7%.
No matter. More data is on the way, and the Federal Reserve will be watching closely.
The latest Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index arrives on Friday. As the Fed's favorite measure of inflation, it could jolt stocks if it's higher than expected, indicating the central bank may need to be more aggressive as it hikes interest rates for the first time in years.
What comes next: Erik Lundh, principal economist at The Conference Board, wrote in a column for CNN Business last week that inflation "should begin to drop soon."
He thinks year-over-year data will "start to tick down" come March, as supply chain problems ease, the effects of the Omicron variant fade and US shoppers start spending more money on services and less on goods.
"Consumers can take some solace knowing that large price increases won't go on forever," he said. "The pandemic seems to be easing, and high inflation will, too."
That said: According to economists at Citi, a "picture is emerging of inflation that is becoming embedded at levels well-above target." Although the Fed aims for 2% inflation, the bank expects the PCE price index to remain at 5.1% for the year to March and near 3.8% around the end of 2022.
That could force the Fed to roll back its crisis-era stimulus even faster.
"As early as this summer the Fed may consider still-more-aggressive interest rate paths to more substantially slow the US economy if monthly inflation is not returning toward target," Citi's team said.
Up next
Monday: US markets closed
Tuesday: S&P Case-Shiller Home Price Index; US consumer confidence; Earnings from Home Depot (HD), Macy's (M), Toll Brothers (TOL) and Virgin Galactic (SPCE)
Wednesday: Earnings from TJX (TJX), Allbirds, Bath & Body Works, Booking Holdings, Hertz (HTZ) and Live Nation (LYV)
Thursday: Initial US jobless claims; new US home sales; Earnings from Alibaba (BABA), Anheuser-Busch InBev (BUD), Cars.com, Moderna (MRNA), Nikola, Papa John's (PZZA), Planet Fitness (PLNT), Beyond Meat (BYND), Etsy (ETSY) and Monster Beverage (MNST)
Friday: US personal income and spending data; PCE index; Earnings from Cinemark (CNK) and Foot Locker (FL)



Electric robots are mapping the seafloor, Earth's last frontier

(CNN Business)For centuries, humans have explored the Earth's mountains, jungles and deserts. But despite covering more than 70% of the Earth's surface, the ocean is still a relative mystery. In fact, we know more about the surface of Mars than we do about the sea floor; just over 20% of the ocean bed has been mapped.
Getting a fuller picture would enable us to navigate ships more safely, create more accurate climate models, lay down telecommunication cables, build offshore windfarms and protect marine species -- all part of what's known as the "blue economy," projected to be worth $3 trillion by 2030.
Underwater robotic vehicles equipped with sensors are helping gather that data quicker and more cheaply than ever before. But many of these vehicles rely on batteries with a limited lifespan, and need to return to a boat or the shore to recharge, making it difficult for them to map more remote parts of the sea.
A five-year-old startup called Seatrec is rising to the challenge, founded by oceanographer Yi Chao. While working at NASA, he developed technology to power ocean robots by harnessing "the naturally occurring temperature difference" of the sea, Chao told CNN Business.
Greener and cheaper
The power module can be installed on existing data-gathering robots or Seatrec's own floating device. This dives a kilometer down to examine the chemistry and shape of the seabed, using sonar to create a map of the surrounding area. The robot returns to the surface to send back its findings via satellite.
As the float moves between colder and warmer parts of the ocean, material inside the module either melts or solidifies, causing pressure that in turn creates thermal energy and powers the robot's generator.
"They get charged by the sea, so they can extend their lifetime almost indefinitely," Chao said.
A basic float model typically costs around $20,000. Attaching Seatrec's energy system adds another $25,000, Chao said.
But the access to free, renewable energy and the ability to stay in the water longer makes data gathering up to five times cheaper in the long run, according to Chao. He said the startup is making fewer than 100 devices per year, primarily for marine researchers, but the technology is easily scalable -- Seatrec's energy module can also be can be retrofitted onto existing mapping devices to extend their range.
Picking up the pace
New technologies that can extend the reach of data-gathering devices are crucial for mapping more remote parts of the deep sea, according Jamie McMichael-Phillips, director of the Nippon Foundation-GEBCO Seabed 2030 Project.
"One of the huge challenges we have is quite simply physics," said McMichael-Phillips. "Unlike mapping the Earth's surface where we can use a camera [or] satellites, at sea, light does not penetrate through the water column. So we're pretty much limited to using sonar systems."
Launched in 2017, the Seabed 2030 Project has increased awareness about the importance of the ocean floor, and given researchers and companies a clear goal to work towards: map the entire seafloor by the end of this decade.
Some companies, such as XOCEAN, are surveying the ocean from the surface. Another startup, Bedrock Ocean Exploration, says it can provide surveys of seabed areas up to 10 times faster than traditional methods by using an autonomous electric submarine fitted with sonars, cameras and lasers; the data is then analyzed on Bedrock's own cloud platform.
The challenge ahead
Even with the growing number of technologies accelerating seabed exploration, completing the map is still a logistical and financial challenge.
Chao estimates that it would take 3,000 of Seatrec's floats operating over the next 10 years to fully survey the ocean. The company has raised $2 million in seed funding to scale up production of its energy harvesting system.
But this is a drop in the ocean of the capital needed to fully survey the ocean, which is estimated to be "somewhere between $3 to $5 billion," according to McMichael-Phillips -- "pretty much the same order of magnitude as the cost of sending a mission to Mars."
Bedrock's DiMare believes it's time we start investing in our own planet.
"If we want to keep Earth as a place that humans can live," he said, "we have got to get a lot smarter about what's going on in the ocean."



Wordle-spoiling bot taken down by Twitter

New York (CNN Business)Twitter has suspended an annoying bot that automatically responded with the next day's solution when people posted their Wordle scores on the platform.
The account, @wordlinator, would tweet: "Guess what. People don't care about your mediocre linguistic escapades. To teach you a lesson, tomorrow's word is...," then adding the spoiler at the end. Twitter removed the account on Tuesday.
A Twitter spokesperson said the account was "suspended for violating the Twitter rules and the automation rules around sending unsolicited @mentions." The platform's terms of service state an account can't be used to disrupt other peoples' experiences using Twitter, including sending a high-volume of unsolicited replies.
The bot was able to spoil future puzzles because the answers to Wordle can easily be found in the game's source code, according to an engineer. Words are assigned to a date and are stored in the player's browser.
Wordle is essentially a modern version of the old game show "Lingo," in which players are given six tries to answer the correct five-letter word. Letters that aren't in the word turn gray, letters that are in the word but in the wrong spot turn yellow and those placed in the right spot turn green.
Thousands of people post their scores every day on Twitter (TWTR), revealing how many, or how few, tries it took them to solve the puzzle and in what order. That social media popularity has pushed Wordle to blossom in popularity in recent weeks, with people sharing their results on Twitter with green, black and yellow tiles.
The New York Times interviewed the game's creator, software engineer Josh Wardle, who built the puzzle for his word-game-loving partner. Wardle — yes, even the game's name is a play on words — eventually took his side project to the public in October after his family played and shared their results via group chat.
"It's something that encourages you to spend three minutes a day," he said in the interview. "It doesn't want any more of your time than that."
-— CNN Business' Ramishah Maruf contributed to this report.



Meet Wordle, the internet's latest obsession

New York  (CNN)Wonder what those green and yellow tiles all over your social media feeds are? It's Wordle, a new no-frills word game that has charmed the internet.
Think of it as Mastermind, but with words instead of colored pegs. Or a mini crossword without clues. You start by choosing any five-letter word and typing it out into the grid. Any incorrect letter pops up in grey. Correct letters turn yellow, and if the letter is also in the right spot it turns green. Users have six tries to guess the word — that's it — the fewer tries, the better. Kinda like golf.
In the midst of a chaotic, polarized news cycle, a simple word game may be just what the internet needs.
Even the story behind the game is intriguing. The New York Times reported it was created by software engineer Josh Wardle for his partner, who loves word games. Wardle -- yes, even the game's name is a play on words -- eventually took his side project to the public in October after its popularity on a family groupchat. It's since grown from 90 players to 300,000 as of last Sunday.
"It's something that encourages you to spend three minutes a day," he said in an interview with the Times. "It doesn't want any more of your time than that."
Deepak Venkatasubramanian of Charlotte, N.C., checks Wordle like the morning paper. It is refreshing to have a sense of routine during a pandemic and in a society with an oversaturation of information, he said. He played a similar word game on family road trips growing up, and now he plays Wordle in a group chat with his friends to keep in touch. His group of recent college graduates even made an Excel sheet to keep tally of scores.
"We have a culture of being able to access everything at once," Venkatasubramanian said. "It's like waiting for an episode of your favorite television show to drop."
The game, a simple enough combination of logic and sheer luck, is blowing up on social media and group chats alike, after Wardle created an easy way to share results by allowing users to copy and paste their colored squares without giving away the word. Thousands of people post their scores every day on Twitter, revealing how many, or how few, tries it took them to solve the puzzle and in what order.
For many, it's become part of their daily routine. Wardle posts a new game every 24 hours on a website he created. There are no frills. Also, no pop-up ads, no pesky login information, no cash grabs.
"I don't understand why something can't just be fun. I don't have to charge people money for this and ideally would like to keep it that way," Wardle said in an interview Wednesday with BBC Radio 4.



These apps are trying to put car dealers out of business

London (CNN Business)City dwellers are used to switching between apps to decide the best way to get from A to B. Is it quickest to get the train or the bus? What about a taxi or a city bike? Which provider has the nearest e-scooter?
It can be inconvenient and time consuming. Which is why Finnish startup MaaS Global decided to aggregate all these services into one app called Whim. Available in more than 10 cities across Europe and Asia, users can access taxis, buses, bikes, e-scooters and rental cars.
"Whim's sole purpose is to compete against car ownership," CEO Sampo Hietanen tells CNN Business.
According to the International Energy Agency, transport is responsible for 24% of global energy-related CO2 emissions, most of which come from passenger vehicles. If Whim can persuade users to trade their car keys for a single app offering multiple transport options, the environmental impact could be enormous, says Hietanen.
Car competition
He admits this isn't an easy task. To succeed Whim has to be more convenient and cheaper than owning a car. "The car represents freedom of mobility," says Hietanen — even if a city dweller barely uses it, they still keep it parked outside as a "freedom insurance."
To compete, Whim offers rental cars and taxis, but Hietanen says that users tend to opt for public transport or micromobility (shared lightweight vehicles such as bikes or e-scooters).
Users can choose between multiple tiers of service, including a pay-as-you-go option and a 30-day season ticket, which costs €62 ($73) in Helsinki — where the app is most established — for unlimited public transport and short taxi rides. The ticket also offers car rental from €55 ($65) per day.
While Helsinki has well-developed alternatives to driving, that's not true of everywhere. If a city "does not have a wide public transport system or a lot of rental cars or taxis in place" then it will be difficult to convince people to give up their cars, says Maria Kamargianni, associate professor of transport and energy at University College London.
She says apps like Whim represent the first step in tempting people away from car ownership, and adds that the availability of alternative transport options is likely to improve as the market matures. Research firm MarketsandMarkets predicts the global mobility service market will grow from $4.7 billion in 2020 to $70.4 billion by 2030.
MaaS movement
Other providers include Citymapper, which launched a travel pass for Londoners in 2019, and Moovit, which launched an all-in-one mobility app in Israel last year.
Whim, launched in 2016, is one of the earliest providers and has raised more than $60 million from investors such as BP (BP), Mitsubishi (MBFJF) and Toyota Financial Services. It's available in several European cities and in Tokyo, and has racked up 18 million trips globally since launch.
But the business has been hit by the Covid-19 pandemic, says Hietanen; with fewer people traveling, revenues are lower, stalling the company's expansion into other cities.
Finnish newspaper Helsingin Sanomat recently reported that the company had spent €50 million ($59 million) on failed expansion ventures. Hietanen says the money was spent on integrating multiple transportation providers, establishing market readiness in several countries, and developing the complex technology that underpins the app.
"We've known from the beginning that the investment needed to create this would be substantial," he says, adding that the company has recently secured further investment.
Greener travel
Though the industry is in its infancy, Hietanen is confident the demand will be there. A recent report from the International Transport Forum (ITF) says that mobility services will be vital in meeting the needs of a growing world population and fast-paced urbanization. But for growth to happen, "people must choose it over other travel options" such as private motor vehicles.
This is already happening, says Hietanen. According to a company survey carried out in Helsinki, 12% of its users said that Whim had prompted them to give up their cars. "People want the more sustainable solution," he says, "but they still want the freedom of being able to go anywhere, anytime."



The New York Times buys popular word game Wordle

New York (CNN Business)The New York Times has acquired Wordle, the explosively popular game that gives players six chances to guess a five-letter word daily.
The Times, which announced the purchase of the game on Monday, is adding the puzzle to their portfolio of word games such as The Crossword, The Mini and Spelling Bee. As of December 2021, the New York Times (NYT) has over one million Games subscriptions.
"The Times remains focused on becoming the essential subscription for every English-speaking person seeking to understand and engage with the world. New York Times Games are a key part of that strategy," according to the statement. "Wordle will now play a part in that daily experience, giving millions more people around the world another reason to turn to The Times to meet their daily news and life needs."
Josh Wardle, a Brooklyn-based software engineer formerly at Reddit, released the game in October 2021, and it quickly became a cultural phenomenon. Millions of people now play Wordle every day, according to the Times.
In a statement released on Twitter Monday, Wardle wrote of the game's success, "I'd be lying if I said this hasn't been a little overwhelming. After all, I am just one person, and it is important to me that, as Wordle grows, it continues to provide a great experience to everyone."
Wordle, purchased for a price the Times described as being "in the low seven figures," will initially remain free to new and existing players. "We don't have set plans for the game's future," Jordan Cohen, executive director at The Times, said in an email. "At this time, we're focused on creating added value to our existing audience, while also introducing our existing games to an all new audience that has demonstrated their love for word games."
Wardle is working with The Times to ensure that, once the game moves to the paper's site, existing players' wins and streaks are preserved, according to his statement.



Why your Wordle answers might now be different than your friends'

New York (CNN Business)Among the many appeals of the massively successful Wordle game is that it has just one solution per day. Every player in the world is trying to guess the same five-letter word.
Well, it had only one until Tuesday.
The New York Times, which bought Wordle two weeks ago, eliminated some of the original game's solutions, starting with Tuesday's word. We won't spoil what the solution was going to be, in case you're playing an older version of the game, but we'll drop this link here for you if you're curious. (It was solution No. 241.)
Although the vast majority of Wordle players for the past week have been playing on The New York Times' hosted site, at nytimes.com/games/wordle/index.html, some people continue to play the game on its original powerlanguage.co.uk/wordle. If you refresh your browser page or open that link in a new browser window, you will be automatically redirected to the Times' Wordle page. But if you had kept the original site open or downloaded the game, you could continue to play the old version of Wordle.
And that's how two solutions can exist at once. Most of us Wordle fans played solution No. 242 on The New York Times page Tuesday. But some of us still playing the old version played solution No. 241.
That has some folks confused. And, because this is the internet, some folks were apoplectic.
***SPOILER ALERT FOR ORIGINAL-GAME WORDLE PLAYERS***
The New York Times said it eliminated words it found to be too difficult. (It didn't say which ones, but they include "pupal," "fibre" and what would have been today's solution: "agora."). It also took out some rude or offensive words from the list of solutions. (It definitely didn't say which of these were taken out, but they include "wench" and "slave.")
"We are updating the word list over time to remove obscure words to keep the puzzle accessible to more people, as well as insensitive or offensive words," said Jordan Cohen, spokesman for The New York Times, in a statement. "Eventually we will permanently redirect users to the NYTimes.com URL, at which point everyone should be playing the same version, as long as they refresh their browsers."
Some Wordle players have complained on social media that the puzzle's most recent solutions are more difficult than before The New York Times took over. But, if that's the case, it was just a coincidence. Until Tuesday, the solutions on Times' hosted Wordle page mirrored those created by the game's creator, Josh Wardle.
That original list of 2,315 solutions was embedded in the game's code. That means the game was playable offline and could be downloaded onto phones or computers. The solutions to the original Wordle game were predetermined through October 20, 2027. The New York Times (NYT) hasn't said if it plans to make any more changes or additions to that initial list.
Some Wordle players were upset about losing their statistics when the game migrated to The New York Times. The company says it is working to fix that.
"Our priority is making sure people can carry their stats and streaks from the original site, and this is a migration that is happening over time as people play," Cohen said.
Not among those upset about the Times' takeover of Wordle: The folks at The New York Times. Last week, traffic to its website surged 11%, according to data tracker Similarweb. That was by far the biggest weekly gain for any major media outlet, including CNN.



2021 was a dramatic year for Indian IPOs. The hype won't go away next year

New Delhi (CNN Business)India's stock market celebrated an extraordinary year as some of the country's buzziest tech firms made their public debuts. And while one high-profile blunder cast a chill over the festivities, that's probably not enough to stop the excitement in 2022.
By December, more than $15 billion had been raised in Mumbai through initial public offerings, a record amount, according to Dealogic. About $6 billion, or nearly 40%, went to tech companies — another record.
This year was historic for another big reason: It's the first time any of India's tech unicorns, or startups valued at more than $1 billion, have gone public.
Those milestones indicate how much of a shift happened this year for tech darlings tapping investment in Asia's third largest economy. India's unicorns have in the past focused on exclusively raising funds from private markets, fearing that the country's conservative investors would not understand their business models.
Most of these high-profile startups are losing money, which was making retail investors leery, Piyush Nagda, head of investment products at Mumbai-based brokerage Prabhudas Lilladher, told CNN Business.
But that all changed after food delivery giant Zomato made its red hot debut this summer. Nagda said the IPO sent a clear signal that "perception is changing" among investors.
The party that started with Zomato's $1.3 billion IPO — the company popped 65% on listing day to reach a market value of $13 billion — swept up a handful of other tech firms as well. E-commerce company Nykaa and online insurance marketplace Policybazaar each surged on their debuts.
The euphoria came to a screeching halt with Paytm's disastrous IPO last month. The mammoth listing from the digital payments firm crashed 27% on its first day of trading, and hasn't come close to reaching its offer price again.
Despite that fiasco, which analysts blamed on the lack of a clear pathway to profitability and an overly high valuation, other Indian tech firms likely won't be stopped from going public in the coming years. They'll just have to be careful about how they price themselves and whether they're buying too much into the hype.
Why the party could keep going
There are a few reasons to remain hopeful about the Indian tech sector.
Many of the country's digital startups saw a big jump in growth during the pandemic, both in terms of customers and funding.
Coronavirus-related lockdowns have encouraged people outside of major cities to spend money online, speeding up digitization of businesses and opening up more opportunities for technology entrepreneurs.
Tech firms in India have raised nearly $25 billion this year, the highest annual amount ever, according to data platform Tracxn. Some 34 companies have reached unicorn status.
India has also attracted more attention from top global investors this year due to the crackdown on tech firms in China, where authorities have imposed sweeping curbs on private enterprise that have eaten into share prices and triggered concerns about future growth.
As a result of those regulatory actions, "growth investors have shifted funds to India" said Tom Masi and Nuno Fernandes, co-portfolio managers of the emerging wealth strategy at GW&K Investment Management. They told CNN Business that the performances of the two countries have diverged this year, "with India up about 20% and China down 20%."
Nagda also said that interest in Indian tech from global investors has made the sector more attractive to India's tech-savvy millennials. He estimates that India added about 20 million retail investors since April 2020, and between 30% to 40% of them are under the age of 40.
They've been piling into the stock market since the pandemic started, and are eager to invest in the country's internet giants, he added.
And, they should be getting plenty of opportunities next year, with some of India's biggest startups gearing up for IPOs, including Walmart-owned Flipkart and hotel chain OYO.
Young investors don't look at companies in a "traditional" manner "where profitability and those kind of ratios were heavily looked at," Nagda said, adding that there is a "revolutionary change" underway in stock trading in India.
A wake-up call
Even those investors may have their limit, though.
Paytm raised $2.5 billion during its IPO, with almost half of that coming from foreign investors.
The company was valued at $20 billion when it launched its public offering — even though it lost hundreds of millions of dollars last year and seemed far from ready to turn a profit.
"Paytm was overpriced," said Masi and Fernandes. "It required investors to make growth assumptions well into the future for a business model that has not been firmly established."
Some analysts describe Paytm's flop as a much-needed wake-up call for companies that need to rethink their valuations.
"Some rationality will prevail," Nagda said. To see Zomato-like "success stories," you need to "price the stock rightly," he added.
After Paytm's historically terrible debut, some companies in fintech sector are rethinking their IPOs. Paytm's smaller rival Mobikwik said it would defer its IPO, originally planned for November, by a few months.
"The company is witnessing strong business growth, has a clear path to profitability and will list at the right time," it told CNN Business.
Some tech entrepreneurs have urged caution while chasing big money in public markets.
Nithin Kamath, founder of India's largest retail brokerage Zerodha, tweeted recently that his firm won't be filing for an IPO, even though he "can potentially get ridiculous valuations."
"We are in a world where companies are getting priced to perfection based on all the future growth potential. For a stock to do well, you have to outperform," he wrote. "As CEO, I dread to think how you can outperform the already really high expectations that growth companies have today."
Along with managing overwhelming expectations, startups that go public will also have to adjust to the amount of company information they'd be expected to regularly reveal to their new shareholders.
Privately held tech giants are less beholden to such transparency. And many investors think those requirements would be a welcome change.
There will be "visibility into this for the very, very first time," said Karthik Reddy, co-founder of venture capital firm Blume Ventures. "Even I don't know what was going on in all these companies, even though I'm an industry person."



Microsoft's blockbuster Activision Blizzard deal could raise uncomfortable challenges for US antitrust enforcers

New York (CNN Business)It has been about two decades since Microsoft and the US government went head-to-head in one of the country's biggest-ever antitrust battles. In the years since, Microsoft has managed to mostly stay off the radars of lawmakers and antitrust regulators, even as scrutiny of other tech giants has ramped up.
But with its plan to acquire popular video game developer Activision Blizzard (ATVI) for nearly $70 billion, Microsoft (MSFT) may be thrust firmly back into the antitrust spotlight. The blockbuster deal would secure Microsoft's spot among the most dominant global players in gaming alongside Sony and Tencent, and it would expand the tech company's first-party content library to include some of the most popular titles in gaming, including "World of Warcraft" and "Call of Duty."
Industry watchers say it's a risky time for Microsoft to try to push through what would be the largest acquisition in its history. The head of the nation's antitrust enforcement agency, Federal Trade Commission Chair Lina Khan, has pledged to crack down on companies consolidating power and reducing competition in a range of industries, especially technology. Activision Blizzard's stock is currently trading nearly 15% below the acquisition share price, a possible sign of investor skepticism about the deal going through.
Still, Microsoft isn't the only one who faces a risk if the FTC does decide to challenge the deal. It could also present some uncomfortable challenges for Khan and the agency by highlighting limitations in their ability to tackle a new era of potential antitrust issues raised by the tech industry.
In her first six months leading the FTC, Khan laid out an ambitious agenda that involves pushing sweeping reforms to the practice of antitrust law and being more proactive about blocking potentially anticompetitive mergers before they're completed. Her plans have been bolstered by support from the White House and bipartisan agreement among lawmakers about the need to rein in massive tech firms.
Challenging the Microsoft-Activision deal could be a chance for Khan to prove she's serious about taking action. However, there remain serious legal hurdles to the FTC actually winning such a lawsuit (should it decide to bring one) — namely that the law itself is slow to change, and the existing rules and practice may not be enough to block even such a large acquisition.
Both antitrust experts and the FTC itself have also noted that the agency is short on resources, especially compared to large tech companies. And it's unclear whether Khan will want to spend those limited resources on Microsoft and the gaming industry — or, for that matter, to make it one of her first new antitrust fights against Big Tech — rather than focus on some of the other ways tech companies have potentially consolidated markets. For example, Khan's FTC is moving forward with a Trump-era suit to unwind Facebook's years-old acquisitions of Instagram and WhatsApp, and it is also reportedly engaged in an extended review of Amazon's acquisition of movie studio MGM.
It's still early in the process. Microsoft filed formal paperwork with the FTC to kickstart the merger review process and delivered an initial briefing to FTC staff earlier this month. The agency's review process could take months. But antitrust experts say Microsoft's nearly $70 billion bid for Activision will be hard for the FTC to ignore.
A deal of this size "is almost a challenge to Lina Khan to kind of bring it on," Hal Singer, managing director at economics research firm Econ One and a professor at Georgetown Business School, told CNN Business. "She's trying to push back and slow down the train, and this is basically the tech sector just saying, 'You can't stop us.'"
The FTC typically does not discuss deals under review and did not respond to a request for comment on this story. Microsoft pointed CNN Business to comments from President Brad Smith — who was the company's general counsel during its last antitrust battle — in a recent briefing with reporters, where he said it "is so early in the process that we're not yet at a point where we're getting any real feedback [from the FTC]. We wouldn't expect to yet."
Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella also commented on the deal during the briefing, saying: "We want to compete ... I want us to approach this in a principled way where we are building our platforms, our technology, such that we are on the right side of history."
Evaluating the Microsoft deal
At the heart of regulators' evaluation of any merger is the question of how much the deal could reduce competition, and therefore threaten to raise prices for consumers or cause other harms.
There are a few ways to approach this: Because Microsoft, like Activision Blizzard, designs some of its own games, it's possible that the deal could be considered a "horizontal merger," the term for when one company is acquired by a direct competitor, effectively consolidating the market. But because there's significant competition in the game development space, regulators are less likely to be concerned about this aspect of the deal, antitrust experts say.
If the FTC does decide to challenge the deal, it will likely instead be on the grounds that it is an anticompetitive "vertical merger." A vertical merger is one in which one company (think, Microsoft, which creates gaming platforms and consoles) acquires another company in the same industry but a different part of the supply chain (like Activision Blizzard, which makes the games to play on those platforms).
That's where things could start to get tricky for the FTC. It can be harder to prove potential harms from a vertical merger than from a horizontal merger because the economics are more complex, according to Daniel Crane, a law professor and antitrust expert at the University of Michigan. In a horizontal merger, two competitors become one competitor, making it more apparent how overall competition in the market is reduced. But in a vertical merger, the end result is less straightforward. (There have also been fewer challenges to vertical mergers over the past few decades, which would mean less legal precedent to rely on in court.)
In a vertical merger case against Microsoft, regulators would look at whether the deal could result in the denial of a crucial product to competitors that would impede their ability to compete effectively. In this case, that would likely mean looking at whether Microsoft could make existing or future games developed by Activision Blizzard exclusive to its platform, to the detriment of rivals like Sony.
In theory, that proposition is part of what makes the deal attractive. Microsoft has been trying to drive a growing slate of content into its Game Pass subscription offering to attract new users and keep existing ones paying for the membership, said Forrester analyst Will McKeon-Wright. (Microsoft has suggested it won't make Activision content exclusive to its own platforms, although the company could still profit from licensing deals with competitors' platforms.)
Much of the antitrust argument could come down to how you define the market. Regulators would likely want to focus on a smaller market — game consoles, for example — where it could contend that Microsoft is a dominating force. The company, meanwhile, would likely argue that it competes for consumers' attention with a broader collection of companies, such as Netflix and TikTok.
"There might be something in the Activision portfolio, that by denying it to a rival gaming platform, Microsoft could cripple that rival platform," Singer said. If there is, regulators may reasonably be able to make the case that consumers could expect higher prices from the deal.
Still, "the chances for the government, under the current state of the law, are very low for stopping a vertical merger," Singer said. The failed challenge to the AT&T-Time Warner merger in 2018 is one of the only recent examples of litigation over a vertical merger. (Time Warner, which later rebranded as WarnerMedia, is CNN's parent company.)
"If I'm Microsoft and I'm looking at this kind of a deal, I think I'm expecting pushback from the FTC and possibly litigation," Crane said. "But I'm also feeling pretty good about my chances."
The challenge for the FTC
That's where Khan's plans to overhaul the country's approach to antitrust come into play. For the past several decades, antitrust regulators have focused chiefly on the potential for mergers to raise prices for consumers. Now, Khan, who has been concerned about vertical mergers since before starting at the FTC, is proposing a broader framework for how to think about the possible harms from mergers and corporate consolidation, such as the impact on workers in the affected industry.
To that end, the FTC in September withdrew guidelines for evaluating vertical mergers that the agency released during the Trump administration, and is now working with the Justice Department's Antitrust Division to review whether to release updated guidelines that reflect technological and economic changes in recent years. That update could include giving regulators more leeway to consider whether a merger might "tend to create a monopoly," even in its early stages, the agencies said.
The review is being made, at least in part, with an eye toward better regulating the tech companies, who have defended mergers and their growing power by pointing to the many free products and services they provide to consumers.
While the guidelines are not legally binding, the fact that there currently are none for a court to refer to may mean that the FTC is not yet ready to come out swinging with a challenge to the Microsoft-Activision deal. "You want that thing in your hand when you go in to challenge this deal, you really don't want to go in without it," Singer said of the FTC.
But it's unlikely that those revised guidelines, the public comment period for which began last month, will be ready in time for a potential case against the Microsoft deal. Even if the new guidelines were released during litigation, "you know what Microsoft's going to say, they're going to say, 'they wrote these guidelines with us in mind,'" Crane said. (The FTC could wait to take action, as it has shown that it's willing to revisit mergers even years after the fact with its lawsuit seeking to break up Facebook, but Khan has indicated a desire to challenge potentially anticompetitive deals before they go through.)
In the end, the acquisition could end up closing with a consent decree, a settlement where the acquiring company agrees to make some concessions to complete the deal, as many other vertical mergers have in recent decades. Microsoft has already hinted at its willingness to negotiate and play nice with competitors to help ensure the deal goes through. Shortly after the deal was announced, Microsoft's head of Xbox, Phil Spencer, tweeted that he had spoken with leaders at Sony.
"I confirmed our intent to honor all existing agreements upon acquisition of Activision Blizzard and our desire to keep Call of Duty on PlayStation," Spencer said. "Sony is an important part of our industry, and we value our relationship."
And last week, the company made a more detailed appeal to regulators to bless the deal. It promised to ensure that the popular franchises it acquires from Activision Blizzard will remain available on PlayStation under Activision's existing deal with Sony. The company also said it has offered to extend the deal on a "multiyear basis." Activision's existing deal with Sony runs until 2024.
"I would be very surprised if Microsoft wasn't willing to make a number of concessions to get this deal done. The question is whether that would be acceptable," Crane said. "[The FTC] want to be seen as active and doing things and really changing the status quo in antitrust."



India's got the next big thing in tech, and it could be worth $1 trillion

New Delhi (CNN Business)More than two decades ago, India began its transformation into a global IT powerhouse, ushering in an era of wealth and job creation never before seen in the country.
Now, Asia's third largest economy is ready for the next big frontier in tech: Coming up with a new generation of software companies like Zoom or Slack.
The Covid-19 pandemic has forced business around the world to make huge investments in digital infrastructure, furthering the influence of companies providing software-as-a-service, or SaaS. Businesses spent an extra $15 billion per week last year on tech as they scrambled to create safe remote working environments, according to a KPMG survey.
SaaS companies provide web-based applications that take care of everything from how secure the software is to how well it performs. Some of the world's most well-known SaaS companies include Zoom (ZM), SAP Concur and Salesforce (CRM), the American behemoth that owns workplace messaging app Slack.
India's software-as-a-service industry could be worth $1 trillion in value by 2030 and create nearly half a million new jobs, according to a recent report compiled by consulting firm McKinsey & Co. and SaaSBoomi, a community of industry leaders.
There are nearly a thousand such companies in India, of which 10 are unicorns, or startups worth at least $1 billion, the report said.
"This can be as big an opportunity as the IT services industry was in the 90s," said Girish Mathrubootham, CEO of Freshworks, India's best-known SaaS company. It filed for an IPO last month, joining a string of other major Indian tech unicorns that are going public this year.
Freshworks was founded more than a decade ago in the southern Indian city of Chennai. Like Salesforce, it provides software to help companies manage relations with their customers. It's also India's oldest unicorn in the sector, having raised funds from investors such as Tiger Global and Accel, and has more than 50,000 customers. The company was last valued at $3.5 billion in a 2019 funding round, according to data firm Tracxn.
Other Indian SaaS firms have found traction by focusing on niche businesses. Zenoti, for example, is a unicorn that builds software for the spa and beauty salon industry.
Of India's 10 SaaS unicorns, six reached that milestone in 2020, and investors around the world are paying attention. Last year, investors pumped $1.5 billion into Indian SaaS companies, four times more than in 2018 or 2019, according to the SaaSBoomi report.
Bullish investors
Investors are excited about SaaS because of the "massive adoption" of software over the last decade, according to Mohit Bhatnagar, managing director of Sequoia Capital India.
While India is a small player in the global SaaS market, investors say the country could eventually dominate the sector because of two things: its vast pool of English-speaking developers, and the relatively low cost of hiring them.
Thanks to the rise of India's IT industry, software engineering has become one of the most sought-after career options in the country.
"India actually has one of the largest developer communities in the world," Bhatnagar told CNN Business. Many of them have worked at some of the biggest global tech companies.
Abhinav Asthana, the co-founder of Postman, pointed to his experience working as an intern at Yahoo in Bengaluru as instrumental in the decision to build his product.
He came up with the idea to build a tool that would simplify the API (Application Programming Interface) testing process. An API is a programming code that defines how two applications communicate with each other, and Postman says it has made it easier for engineers to work together as they design and build their APIs.
"We saw how software was created at these global companies, and we saw API was a key problem," Asthana told CNN Business.
Now, Postman is India's most valuable SaaS unicorn, with a valuation of $5.6 billion.
International clients, Indian engineers
The low cost of operating in India is a big plus. According to a report by consulting firm Bain & Company, the salary of entry-level developers in India is 85% less than their counterparts in the United States.
"If you are building a SaaS company in the US, it is better to have a million-dollar client rather than a $10,000-client because you need to pay for sales and marketing in that country," said Prasanna Krishnamoorthy, managing partner at SaaS accelerator Upekkha. "When you are serving customers from India, you can have these small and mid-sized companies, as well as large ones."
Most SaaS companies focus on global clients, similar to the strategy that was followed by India's IT giants such as TCS and Infosys (INFY). Investors see this as a welcome change, since most of India's oldest unicorns — from Flipkart to Paytm — have focused primarily on the domestic market.
Almost 98% of Fortune 500 companies use Postman's products, according to Asthana, while Freshworks' first client was based in Australia.
SaaS firms are much better placed to go global than e-commerce companies like India's Flipkart, for example. They write software once, and then are able to use it multiple times.
"For a Flipkart you need billions of dollars [to grow internationally], but for a Freshwork you need much less capital to go global," said Mathrubootham, who is also an investor in Postman. This is because e-commerce firms require a ton of money to set up physical operations elsewhere — they have to hire delivery drivers, rent warehouses and buy inventory.
Bhatnagar of Sequoia Capital said that Indian software entrepreneurs "mastered" the art of "remote sales" fairly early. "Honestly, in this last two years, the whole world has had to understand how to do better remote sales," he added.
Despite the euphoria, there are some hurdles Indian companies have to overcome before they can deliver on the $1 trillion promise.
Indian engineers trained in the IT services industry may find it hard to develop the discipline required to build a product-focused company.
In IT services, "you are selling bodies and you say yes to everything the customer says," said Krishnamoorthy. SaaS companies, on the other hand, have to say no to 99% of [potential] customers, he added.
And India's startup ecosytem is still relatively immature when compared to Silicon Valley. Despite the massive size of some homegrown unicorns, Mathrubootham said that the country does not have a "global tech powerhouse product brand."
But he hoped that future SaaS companies can change that.
"It is my personal dream to see India as a product nation," he added.



'Uncharted' banks on Tom Holland for a big debut

New York (CNN Business)After swinging through New York City as Spider-Man, Tom Holland returns this weekend with another film that has him dangling from great heights. This time he does so as adventurer and video game mainstay Nathan Drake.
"Uncharted" — based on a best-selling Sony video game  — hopes to use Holland's star power and the studio's box-office momentum to give the theater industry a boost.
The film is projected for roughly a $30 million opening over the holiday weekend. Some analysts are predicting that the film could make a tad bit more thanks to the recognition of Holland and the "Uncharted" series. The film brought in $3.7 million for its Thursday previews.
But how much "Uncharted" will make this weekend is still — like Drake himself — up in the air.
Sony's secret weapon
"Uncharted" — which cost $120 million to make and is opening 4,200 locations — has a lot working for it this weekend. That starts with Holland.
"If Sony has a secret weapon, it may indeed be Tom Holland," Paul Dergarbedian, senior media analyst at Comscore (SCOR), told CNN Business. "But that secret weapon will be tested this weekend."
Sony (SNE) and Holland are coming off "Spider-Man: No Way Home," which had the second biggest box office opening of all time. It also captivated pop culture for weeks and arguably revitalized the film industry in the middle of a pandemic.
Since shattering box office records, the Marvel film has become one of Hollywood's most successful blockbusters ever, notching nearly $2 billion worldwide. It just became the third-highest-grossing film in North American history, overtaking "Avatar."
That's good news for the ticket sales of "Uncharted" because the film has a "halo effect" around it, according to Dergarabedian.
A film as popular as "No Way Home" could bring in moviegoers to "Uncharted" who love Holland, despite not knowing the difference between Nathan Drake and Peter Parker. ("Uncharted" also stars Mark Wahlberg, so Holland won't have to carry the treasure hunt adventure film on his own.)
However, a huge question remains: Can Sony nab a boffo box office with Holland not in his spidey suit? That's what the studio is betting on this weekend, and the stakes are high with a potentially new franchise for the studio on the line.
While "Uncharted" has a lot going for it, it is still a movie based on a video game — a genre that "has had one of the most uneven track records in the history of the box office," according to Dergarabedian.
Sonic or Super Mario?
Video game movies have historically been more miss than hit at the ticket booth.
For every "Sonic The Hedgehog" — which made more than $300 million worldwide in 2020 — there are video game films like "Max Payne," "Doom" and 1993's "Super Mario Bros.," all of which were flops.
But video games are especially popular with young males, and that demographic has been a "key factor in the recovery of movie theaters over the past year," according to Dergarabedian.
On top of all of that, "Uncharted" is one of the most popular video game series there is.
The brand — which has users play as Drake as he takes on exciting Indiana Jones-esque adventures — has multiple sequels and spinoffs for Sony's beloved video game platform, PlayStation. (So that's also a nice piece of synergy for the company as well.)
This could help "Uncharted" avoid the video game curse at the box office that has plagued many big budget gaming adaptations like it.
And it doesn't hurt that Sony has been on a winning streak at the box office lately.
Sony's hot streak
Sony had a strong 2021, and most of it came in the final three months of the year.
The studio kicked off October with "Venom: Let There Be Carnage." The film about the Spider-Man villain had a $90 million opening (a pandemic record at the time) and has since brought in more than $500 million globally.
In November, Sony followed up its Venom success with "Ghostbusters: Afterlife" which made close to $200 million worldwide.
Then in December, it released "No Way Home."
That type of momentum could help "Uncharted" this weekend and lead to another strong year for the studio.
"All of these films seemed impervious to any negative effects that the pandemically challenged marketplace may have thrown at other films," Dergarabedian said. "Now it's 'Uncharted's' turn to see if it can keep Sony's streak going into 2022."



A Super Bowl hangover for sports betting companies

New York (CNN Business)The Super Bowl was a bonanza for the gambling business thanks to new customers from New York, which recently legalized sports betting. But now comes the hard part for companies like DraftKings and FanDuel.
Betting upstarts need to spend big bucks to attract new users — but like a gambler chasing a huge payday, companies can easily get in over their heads with marketing and acquisition costs if they're not careful.
That challenge was on full display with DraftKings, whose shares plunged nearly 20% Friday despite sales that topped expectations and a boosted outlook.
Investors are clearly concerned that the company is expected to continue losing money this year as it spends heavily on ads and promotions. And DraftKings also said first-quarter sales  would be lower than Wall Street forecasts.
Ad spend isn't the only headwind for DraftKings. CEO Jason Robins said in an interview with CNN Business that the current lockout in Major League Baseball could be a problem since it may lead to a delayed start and shortened season.
"When games are not being played, that is not positive for us," Robins said, comparing the possibility of fewer baseball games to the shutdown of nearly all sports that took place in the spring of 2020 at the start of the pandemic. "Hopefully, baseball will figure this out."
Meanwhile, DraftKings faces tough competition from FanDuel — owned by UK-based sports betting company Flutter Entertainment (PDYPF) — as well as traditional casinos such as MGM (MGM), Caesars (CZR) and Penn National Gaming (PENN), which has a big minority stake in Barstool Sports.
The crowded field forces rivals to try to out-promote one another other, often luring them with limited offers of free bets. The hope is to gain a loyal and frequent customer, but such promotions eat into short-term profits.
Targeted approaches are key. Robins told investors during a conference call Friday morning that the company was not planning to spend too heavily in new markets.
"When the New York market launched, there was some aggressive promotional behavior by many operators, but DraftKings is committed to maintaining its disciplined approach to customer acquisition and is targeting a two- to three-year path to profitability for the state," Robins said.
Robins added during the interview with CNN Business that the company had record volume for the Super Bowl. He also said that the increased marketing by DraftKings and its rivals was a positive for the overall industry.
"We're doing better than ever and the increased overall spending is helping us. There is a lot of awareness for the industry," Robins said.
But investors don't seem to see it that way. The sports betting market is still in the nascent, land-grab stage where market share may matter more than profits. And there is big money backing some of DraftKings' rivals.
Competition is fierce
Barry Diller's IAC (IAC) media conglomerate owns a more than 12% stake in MGM and recently announced plans to raise that stake to nearly 15%. CEO Joey Levin said in an interview with CNN Business that MGM's New York launch was successful, and Super Bowl demand was strong
Flutter's FanDuel is also aggressively going after new customers, while trying to keep existing gamblers happy in its established markets.
FanDuel chief marketing officer Mike Raffensperger told CNN Business before the Super Bowl that there was no doubt that 2022 would be the biggest year so far for betting on the game. That's a function of both new states like New York as well as strong growth in maturer markets like neighboring New Jersey, where sports betting has been legal since summer 2018.
"We're talking about 70% more bets on the Super Bowl from this time a year ago," Raffensperger said.
Raffensperger added that there was a lot of interest in so-called "proposition bets" — wagers that go beyond traditional bets. One popular prop bet let people wager on a player who wasn't a quarterback throwing a touchdown. (That gamble paid off: Cincinnati running back Joe Mixon passed for a score.)
Still, shares of FanDuel owner Flutter have also been hurt by the intense competition. The stock is down 6% in 2022 and more than 20% in the past 12 months. MGM, Caesars and Penn are in the red this year, too.
Investors aren't betting on a long-term winner in the industry just yet. They're waiting for the dust to settle after the marketing blitz is over.



'Uncharted' is another box office win for Tom Holland and Sony

New York (CNN Business)Tom Holland does it again for Sony.
"Uncharted" — starring Holland as adventurer Nathan Drake from the namesake Sony (SNE) video game — brought in an estimated $44.1 million at the North American box office this weekend, according to the studio.
That number exceeded industry expectations, which had projected the film to make around $30 million in its weekend debut. Sony added that the new release could take in $51 million over the holiday weekend, which includes Presidents Day.
The solid debut for "Uncharted" — which cost $120 million to make — is another win for Holland and Sony following their mutual success with "Spider-Man: No Way Home."
"No Way Home" is one of the biggest blockbusters in film history, notching nearly $2 billion worldwide since December, according to Comscor. (SCOR) "Uncharted" likely got a boost from that film's strong showing, but there was still a question if Holland could bring in an audience when he's not wearing his Spider-Man suit. The answer appears to be yes.
For Sony, the strong opening keeps the studio's winning streak alive.
Sony had a strong 2021 thanks to "Venom: Let There Be Carnage," "Ghostbusters: Afterlife" and "No Way Home" to cap off the year.
The good showing for "Uncharted" is another successful video game adaptation. Films based on video games have historically had a hit or miss track record at the box office, but it appears that so far "Uncharted" has landed in the hit category.
As for theater operators, "Uncharted" serves as a solid bridge to one of the most anticipated films on the year: "The Batman."
Warner Bros.' next installment in the Batman franchise hits theaters March 4 and stars Robert Pattinson as the Caped Crusader. The film could be one of the biggest blockbusters of the year. (Warner Bros. and CNN are both owned by WarnerMedia.)



How Heinz uses a fake number to keep its brand timeless

New York (CNN Business)Heinz has been linked to the number 57 for more than a century. The company's "57 varieties" slogan was a key part of its early strategy to attract consumers. It's still featured on Heinz ketchup bottles today and is central to the brand's identity.
But that famous number is completely made up.
There weren't 57 Heinz varieties when Pittsburgh business magnate H.J. Heinz first invented the slogan in 1896. Nor when Heinz 57 sauce was introduced soon after. There aren't 57 now. There are, in fact, hundreds of Heinz varieties.
The 57 on a Heinz bottle is more than just the right spot to smack to make the ketchup ooze out at .028 miles per hour. That number has stuck around for 126 years because it reinforces Heinz as a nostalgic and distinctly American food brand — the condiment you put on your hot dog at a baseball game or on a burger at a summer barbeque, marketing experts say.
In the early 1890s, H.J. Heinz, once described by a biographer as a "marketing genius," sold bottled horseradish, pickles, pepper sauce, ketchup — introduced by the company in 1876 spelled "catsup" and soon changed to "ketchup" to distinguish the product — among some 60 food items. Pickles were Heinz's biggest success at the time, and he became known as the "pickle king."
Visiting New York City in 1896, Heinz spotted an advertisement for "21 styles" of shoes. He found it memorable and thought attaching a number to his own brand would help it stick with consumers.
There are varying theories on why he landed on 57.
Ashleigh Gibson, Heinz's brand director, said in an email that the company's founder felt there was something "mystical, magical, and memorable" about the number 57, which was a combination of five, his lucky number, and seven, his wife's lucky number.
But Heinz's personal secretary, who wrote an early biography of his boss, said that when Heinz was counting up the number of varieties the company sold in 1896, the number seven jumped out at him.
"Seven, seven —there are so many illustrations of the psychological influences of that figure and of its alluring significance to people of all ages and races," Heinz said, according to the biography. "58 Varieties or 59 Varieties did not appeal at all to me as being equally strong."
Within a week of seeing the shoe ad, the "57 varieties'" slogan was appearing in newspapers and on billboards, Heinz wrote in his diary. The company carved 57 on hillsides for train passengers to see and "57 Good Things For The Table" was featured on the first electric billboard in New York City in 1900. The sign stood six stories high, had 1,200 fluorescent light bulbs and included a 43-foot-long flashing Heinz pickle, according to the Henry Ford Museum of American Innovation.
"I myself did not realize how highly successful a slogan it was going to be," Heinz said.
'Good luck charm'
Today, "57 varieties" is slapped high on the neck of Heinz's octagon-shaped glass tomato ketchup bottles. In the center, "57 varieties" is printed in small gold lettering above a hanging tomato vine on the keystone-shaped label modeled after Heinz's home state. 57 is also featured on Heinz's baked beans, mustard, mayonnaise and cream of tomato soup.
The slogan is used as a branding device to convey a "sense of timelessness and authenticity" to consumers, Kelly Haws, a marketing professor who studies consumer choices about food at Vanderbilt University, said in an email.
Gibson said the slogan has become "a brand asset," similar to the company's logo, keystone and glass bottle design, reminding consumers of Heinz' history.
Heinz and its association with 57 have also served as minor footnotes in US history.
When Joe DiMaggio's record hit streak ended at 56 games in 1941, the Yankees star reportedly told a teammate that he missed out on $10,000 promised to him by Heinz if he matched its label.
According to "Demagogue," a 2020 biography of Sen. Joe McCarthy, McCarthy once told a reporter "probably in jest" that when he alleged he had a list of 57 names of communists working in the State Department, he came up with the number from a bottle of Heinz ketchup. It's even is a plot point in the 1962 film "The Manchurian Candidate."
Then there's the Heinz 57 sauce for steak, chicken and pork, which was memorialized by Jimmy Buffet's "Cheeseburger in Paradise": "I like mine with lettuce and tomato, Heinz 57 and French fried potatoes."
Noel Geoffrey, who led the Heinz ketchup division from 2008 to 2011, said 57 was "like a good luck charm" at the company. The telephone number for the main switchboard at its previous headquarters — the Heinz 57 Center— was, of course, 57. In 2001, the company paid the Pittsburgh Steelers $57 million over 20 years for naming rights to the stadium.
"It was everywhere," Geoffrey said, "and part of the DNA of the company."
Innovation in food marketing
It may seem commonplace today, but the idea of "57 varieties" was a significant innovation in food marketing at the time. In the late 19th century, packaged and processed foods were a new concept to the public.
"The big shift was to try to create a consumer population for pre-packaged food," said Rita McGrath, a professor at Columbia Business School who has studied the rise of major food brands. "Before then, food wasn't marketed."
H.J. Heinz also had to convince consumers that his products were safe during an era before food was regulated. One way he tried to convey quality was to sell his goods in glass jars, so customers could see what was inside.
His choice of the word "variety" was another attempt to signal that Heinz was experienced in a range of products, suggesting to customers they could trust the brand.
"Variety has always been a thing Americans love," said Ken Albala, a food historian at the University of the Pacific. "They want choice. Even if it's flavors of the same thing."
By the beginning of the 20th century, Heinz was America's largest ketchup manufacturer. The brand accounted for roughly 70% of the ketchup market last year, according to Euromonitor data. Hunt's, its closet competitor, had 8%.
'Comfort in the familiar'
The famous number has stuck around through more than a century of different advertising campaigns and changes to Heinz packaging.
It also survived different corporate owners. In 2013, Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway (BRKA) and Brazilian private equity firm 3G Capital bought H.J. Heinz. Two years later, Kraft Foods and H.J. Heinz merged, and the company was renamed Kraft Heinz (KHC).
"There's a comfort in the familiar," McGrath said. "Once you got something like that that sticks, people are reluctant to change because of the brand association."
In 2009, Heinz changed the design of its ketchup label for the first time in more than 60 years, replacing the Gherkin pickle that was under the words "tomato ketchup" with a tomato on the vine. Noel Geoffrey, who oversaw the redesign, said there was never any consideration of removing 57 from the label.
But Emily Ruby, a curator at the Sen. John Heinz History Center in Pittsburgh and author of "57 Servings from the Heinz Table," said she was surprised by the change because Heinz "stuck so long to these symbols of the past."
When Kraft and Heinz merged in 2015, there was fear in Pittsburgh about losing the link between Heinz and the city. Kraft Heinz has co-headquarters in Pittsburgh and Chicago.
"There's a sense the company is no longer tied to the history and the region," she said. If Kraft Heinz were to drop the 57, "I think people would be really upset because they like the connection."
Whenever Ruby gives local talks on H.J. Heinz or the history of the company, she is always asked about the origins of the number. People even offer up their own theories about its meaning.
"There's still a lot of curiosity out there about it," Ruby said.



Credit Suisse pushes back on reports of controversial accounts

New York  (CNN Business)Credit Suisse pushed back Sunday after multiple media outlets reported that the Swiss investment bank had clients that included criminals, alleged human rights abusers and parties facing sanctions.
"Credit Suisse strongly rejects the allegations and insinuations about the bank's purported business practices," the bank said in a news release Sunday. "The matters presented are predominantly historical, in some cases dating back as far as the 1940s, and the accounts of these matters are based on partial, inaccurate, or selective information taken out of context, resulting in tendentious interpretations of the bank's business conduct."
The Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, a non-profit reporting platform, said in a news release that a whistleblower leaked information to the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung. The OCCRP said that its investigation looked at data from more than 18,000 accounts worth more than $100 billion, opened between the 1940s and the 2010s.
Süddeutsche Zeitung and 46 other news organizations — including The New York Times and The Guardian — collaborated on the analysis and reported details of the data in an investigation titled "Suisse Secrets."
The OCCRP and Süddeutsche Zeitung coordinated the project.
The OCCRP release said the project's reporting indicates that the bank's clients include a "Yemeni spy chief implicated in torture" and Venezuelan officials accused of corruption, among others.
"I've too often seen criminals and corrupt politicians who can afford to keep on doing business as usual, no matter what the circumstances, because they have the certainty that their ill-gotten gains will be kept safe and always within their reach," said OCCRP co-founder Paul Radu in a statement.
In a statement provided by the OCCRP, the whistleblower who provided the information said Swiss banking secrecy laws are "immoral" and enable corruption.
Credit Suisse said Sunday that about 90% of the accounts mentioned are closed or were in the process of closing before the project's reporting and that it has taken significant steps to combat financial crime in the last decade. Although it said it cannot comment on potential client relationships, the bank confirmed it is taking action "in line with applicable policies and regulatory requirements."
"These media allegations appear to be a concerted effort to discredit not only the bank but the Swiss financial market-place as a whole, which has undergone significant changes over the last several years," the bank said Sunday.



India wants to launch a digital rupee and tax crypto profits

New Delhi (CNN Business)India is planning to launch a digital version of the rupee, becoming the latest country to join the rush to create state-backed virtual currencies.
The country's central bank expects to introduce the currency "using blockchain and other technologies" some time in the new fiscal year, which begins in April, according to Indian Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman.
Presenting India's annual budget to parliament on Tuesday, Sitharaman said the digital rupee would "give a big boost to the digital economy." She did not give any further details about what the launch would entail, how widely a digital rupee might be used initially, or what impact it might have.
Digital payments have grown dramatically in popularity in India since late 2016, when Prime Minister Narendra Modi banned the country's two biggest rupee bank notes. Apart from homegrown players such as Paytm, some of the world's biggest tech companies, including Google (GOOGL) and Facebook (FB), have joined India's cashless payments boom.
The announcement comes as other major economies move forward with their own plans to launch virtual versions of their own currencies. China has been trialing its digital yuan in major cities for the last two years. It's one of only three payment methods available to athletes, officials and journalists attending the Beijing Winter Olympics this month.
Europe and the United States have also been exploring the possibilities for a digital euro and digital dollar, though both have stressed the importance of mitigating financial risk presented by any e-currency.
India has for years expressed concern about cryptocurrencies and how best to regulate digital assets, at times even flirting with a ban on cryptos. A cryptically worded proposal posted on the Indian parliament website last year suggested the government was exploring plans to "prohibit all private cryptocurrencies in India."
The central bank has often expressed concerns that cryptocurrencies can be used for money laundering and to finance terrorism.
No ban on cryptocurrencies
In her speech Tuesday, Sitharaman suggested that authorities are willing to continue allowing crypto trading in the country, albeit with some regulations. She said that the Indian government would impose a 30% tax on income from virtual digital assets.
"There has been a phenomenal increase in transactions in virtual digital assets," Sitharaman said. "The magnitude and frequency of these transactions have made it imperative to provide for a specific tax regime."
The budget speech was greeted with a sigh of relief from India's crypto investors, and industry experts pointed to Sitharaman's remarks as a sign that Asia's third largest economy would not ban virtual currencies.
"Hope to see a reduction of crypto ban fear in India." tweeted Nischal Shetty, the founder of cryptocurrency platform WazirX, on Tuesday. "Lot to unpack here but overall this is a very positive step forward for crypto ecosystem in India."
Virtual currencies have become attractive to Indians since the start of the pandemic. While the government does not keep estimates of how many people trade cryptocurrencies, media reports have suggested that the country may hold as many as 20 million crypto investors, citing industry experts.
"Taxation of virtual digital assets or crypto is a step in the right direction. It gives much-needed clarity and confidence to the industry," said Sumit Gupta, co-founder of CoinDCX, an exchange that is also India's first crypto unicorn.



Hyundai triggers diplomatic spat over Kashmir

New Delhi/Islamabad  (CNN Business)South Korean automaker Hyundai faced controversy this week in India, sparking diplomatic tensions between Seoul and Delhi.
India's Ministry of External Affairs said Tuesday that it summoned the Korean ambassador to express "strong displeasure" over what the agency called an "unacceptable social media post" made by one of Hyundai's Pakistan-based distributors.
Hyundai Pakistan on Saturday apparently tweeted support for Kashmir Solidarity Day, a holiday in Pakistan to mark the nation's support for people in the India-administered part of Kashmir. Both countries have claimed the region in its entirety.
"India welcomes investments by foreign companies in various sectors," said Indian foreign ministry spokesman Arindam Bagchi in the statement. "But, it is also expected that such companies or their affiliates will refrain from false and misleading comments on matters of sovereignty and territorial integrity."
CNN Business was unable to view the tweet before it was taken down, but widely circulated screenshots show that it carried a hashtag for the holiday, and expressed support for pro-separatists in Kashmir.
Reuters reported that posts on behalf of Hyundai's partner in Pakistan also appeared on Facebook and Instagram. CNN Business was unable to view those posts, but they commemorated "what it described as the sacrifices of Kashmiris struggling for self-determination," according to Reuters.
Local businesses typically put out statements to highlight the efforts of Kashmiri separatists in the region, which is one of the world's most dangerous geopolitical flashpoints. But the Hyundai Pakistan tweet highlights how challenging it can be for multinational brands to navigate such issues.
The Hyundai Pakistan tweet sparked intense backlash in India: Indian Twitter users vowed to stop buying Hyundai-manufactured vehicles in favor of supporting local carmakers, such as Tata Motors and Mahindra Auto.
Hyundai apologized twice. First on Sunday, Hyundai India said the "unsolicited social media post" offended the brand's "unparalleled commitment" to the country. The company added that it respects "nationalism," and called India a "second home." It condemned the views expressed in the post by the Pakistani account.
Hyundai again tried to quell the furor on Tuesday with another tweet — this time, credited to parent firm Hyundai Motor Company — that attempted to distance the Indian subsidiary from the partner in Pakistan. The Kashmir tweet, Hyundai said, was sent by an "independently-owned distributor in Pakistan."
"As a business policy, Hyundai Motor Company does not comment on political or religious issues in any specific region," the automaker said in the post.
It added that "once the situation was brought to our attention, we made the distributor acutely aware of their inappropriateness of the action. Hyundai also said it has "put in place processes to prevent a future recurrence."
Hyundai representatives in India, Pakistan and South Korea did not respond to requests for further comments from CNN Business.
Hyundai Pakistan is operated as a joint venture between Hyundai (HYMTF) and Nishat Group, one of Pakistan's largest conglomerates. Hyundai also has a wholly-owned subsidiary in neighboring India, making it one of the few foreign automakers to crack the competitive Indian market.
Nishat Group declined to comment to CNN Business.



India's billionaire vaccine prince held the key to ending the pandemic. His plans went awry

As Covid-19 wreaked havoc around the world last year, the 39-year-old son of an Indian billionaire was laying the groundwork for a plan he hoped would eventually end the pandemic.
Adar Poonawalla — the CEO of Serum Institute of India (SII), the world's largest vaccine maker — pumped hundreds of millions of dollars into his Indian manufacturing facility and committed to make millions of doses of a then-unproven coronavirus vaccine.
That vaccine, created by Oxford University and AstraZeneca (AZN), was still in clinical trials at the time. Nobody was sure how long a vaccine would take to develop, let alone whether it would even work.
"It was a calculated risk," Poonawalla told CNN Business. "But I didn't see the choice at that time, to be honest. I just felt I'd regret not committing one way or another."
To make his plan work, Poonawalla first had to raise nearly $1 billion. And the lives of hundreds of millions of the planet's most vulnerable people were at stake, since SII had pledged to provide poorer countries with jabs. If the gamble paid off, Poonawalla would save countless lives and be hailed as a hero during a period of historic turmoil. His fabulously rich family also would stand to grow even more wealthy by profiting from a significant deal.
As the world gave its money — and trust — to Poonawalla, things seemed to be going according to plan. The AstraZeneca vaccine received approval from UK regulators in December 2020, and Poonawalla became a household name in India.
But soon it became evident how badly Poonawalla had miscalculated the challenges that come with distributing millions of vaccines in the middle of a once-in-a-century pandemic.
His company's ability to inoculate even his own countrymen was thrown into doubt earlier this year as a devastating wave of coronavirus hit India. He's also failed to keep up with his commitment to deliver shots to other nations — the consequences of which have dented his reputation and shed light on the perils of such heavy reliance on one manufacturer.
From horse breeders to vaccine makers
It's easy to see why some of the biggest names in public health chose to rely on Poonawalla.
Few manufacturers can come close to the scale at which SII is able to produce vaccines. The company — which was founded by Poonawalla's father, Cyrus, 55 years ago — produces 1.5 billion vaccines each year for measles, rubella, tetanus and many other diseases. The jabs are mainly distributed to low-income countries worldwide, including India. Poonawalla estimates that just over 50% of the world's babies depend on vaccines made at SII.
The Poonawalla family charted an unusual path to becoming one of the world's preeminent vaccine makers. They have bred and raced thoroughbred horses since the 1940s, diversifying into pharmaceuticals, finance and real estate over the last half-century.
Cyrus Poonawalla is now India's seventh-richest man, worth more than $16 billion, according to the Bloomberg Billionaire Index. His son Adar took over as CEO in 2011 and has focused on expanding in international markets.
To prepare for the AstraZeneca vaccine production, Poonawalla said he spent $800 million on buying chemicals, glass vials and other raw materials, as well as ramping up manufacturing capacity at his plant in the Western Indian city of Pune.
More than $250 million came from the company's own funds. Another $300 million came from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, which SII collaborated with to provide discounted or free doses to low-income countries. The rest was paid by other countries once SII started accepting orders for vaccines. In total, SII agreed to make up to 200 million vaccine doses for as many as 92 countries, as part of its deal with the Gates Foundation and Gavi, a vaccine alliance.
All of that happened, though, before regulators signed off on the AstraZeneca vaccine. Had trials for that vaccine been unsuccessful, SII would "just be making batches and then end up throwing them away," Poonawalla said.
A business studies graduate of London's University of Westminster, Poonawalla said SII was able to make that decision more swiftly than many other companies, since it is a family-run business.
"The flexibility of being able to decide on the spot very quickly was really the main game-changer that enabled us to be able to do this," said Poonawalla, whose office in India is a refurbished Airbus A320.
After UK regulators approved the vaccine, Poonawalla began supplying doses to Indians and other other countries. By May, Gavi had received some 30 million jabs from SII.
India's Covid-19 tsunami
But Poonawalla's plans soon went awry when a second wave of Covid-19 hit India in the spring. At its peak the country was reporting over 400,000 cases per day, though experts say the actual number was likely much higher.
At that point, only 2% percent of India's 1.3 billion population was fully vaccinated, and the country's national government had been slow in placing orders for more vaccines. Without a massive stockpile, states in India began to run out of the limited number of jabs they had.
India then decided to stop the export of all vaccines, preventing SII from keeping up with its commitments elsewhere.
"I've always been a patriot for my country ... and if my country needs my facility first, I have to do what they say," Poonawalla said. "There was no two ways about that."
The inability to export vaccines hurt some of the poorest nations in the world. The director of Africa's disease control body, for example, warned India's hold on exports could be "catastrophic" for the continent. People in several countries, from neighboring Nepal to Kenya, were left stranded after receiving the first dose of Covishield, the name of the India-manufactured vaccine.
When asked why the global vaccine alliance chose to rely so heavily on one manufacturer, a Gavi spokesperson told CNN Business it had few options.
At the start of 2021, "very few vaccines were approved and available for deployment," the spokesperson said, adding that it was "natural" that SII would be contracted for early doses given its size.
But public health expert Jeffrey Lazarus said there were flaws in the plan.
"Relying on one manufacturer was a mistake, which is easier to see in hindsight," said Lazarus, who heads the health systems research group at the Barcelona Institute for Global Health.
Being held to account
While Poonawalla cannot be held responsible for some of the issues that led to the vaccine rollout stalling — chief among them, India's massive outbreak — his detractors have questioned parts of his approach.
They point out Poonawalla hasn't delivered the number of jabs he initially promised, and they claim he hasn't been transparent about how he's been using all of the money he raised for the big vaccine push.
"There isn't much accountability for where the money he raised went," Malini Aisola, co-convenor of health sector watchdog All India Drug Action Network, told CNN Business.
In June last year, SII pledged it would make one billion doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine for low and middle income countries, with 400 million doses ready by the end of 2020.
But by January 2021, the company had a stockpile of just 70 million doses. His critics weren't impressed, given the amount of capital he raised last year.
The global media coverage also turned unfavorable, with headlines linking the global shortfall in vaccines to SII's problems, including the India export ban and a fire at the company's Pune facility. At the time Poonawalla said the fire had no effect on Covishield production. But he has since reversed course, saying that the incident has played a major role in hampering manufacturing.
He also insists he was realistic about his goals. "We always underpromise," Poonawalla told CNN Business, when asked whether the company pledged more than it could deliver.
Still, he's been dogged by other controversies that have dented his reputation. As India's Covid-19 cases were skyrocketing in April, Poonawalla lowered the price of his vaccine and referred to the move as a "philanthropic gesture" — leading to heavy criticism, with activists pointing out that even a small profit is still a profit for SII.
"AstraZeneca has pledged that it won't make profits from low income and middle income countries during the pandemic, but that does not seem to apply to SII," Aisola said.
According to AstraZeneca, the companies the drugmaker has sublicensing agreements with, including SII, dictate their own prices.
SII declined to comment on how much it has profited from the vaccine efforts so far, but Poonawalla said it is a "very unreasonable and naive way of looking at the world" for people to expect companies not to profit from the vaccine.
While Poonawalla has yet to match his lofty goals, there is a chance that he and SII can get back on track, which is critical to ending vaccine inequality worldwide. India has decided to begin exporting vaccines once again as its own rate of inoculation increases. The nation had administered one billion doses by October — about 90% of which came from SII, according to the company.
SII also says that it has increased its production to 220 million doses a month as of October.
SII is also expanding its partnerships, having signed a deal with American biotech firm Novavax to manufacture its Covid-19 vaccine, which is awaiting regulatory approvals. It's also partnering with the Russian Direct Investment Fund on production of the Sputnik vaccine.



Fed adopts strict trading rules after ethics scandal

The Federal Reserve on Friday adopted an extensive set of restrictions on trading by policymakers and senior Fed staff. The move comes after an ethics scandal that embroiled policymakers and threatened to shake confidence in the central bank's integrity.
The Fed said the rules are meant "to ensure public confidence in the impartiality and integrity of the Committee's work."
Under the new rules, some of which were first unveiled last October, top Fed officials are banned from purchasing stocks and sector funds, and from holding individual bonds, agency-backed securities, cryptocurrencies, commodities or foreign currencies.
The use of derivatives, short sales and purchasing securities on margin are also banned, and officials will have to give 45 days advance notice and obtain approval for any transaction. All investments must be held for at least a year, the rules say.
Most of the Fed's new trading restrictions will come into effect on May 1, with pre-clearance and advance notice rules in force from July 1. Current Fed officials will have 12 months to come into compliance, the central bank said; new staff and policymakers will have six months from the date they join.
The Fed put in place the rules after Boston Fed chief Eric Rosengren and Dallas Fed president Robert Kaplan resigned following reports of their active trading in 2020, when the central bank launched a massive effort to fight the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. The Fed's efforts helped bolster financial markets.
Another policymaker, then Fed Vice Chair Richard Clarida, also came under fire after he corrected a previous financial disclosure in late December to show he sold a stock fund and then swiftly rebought it shortly before the Fed announced a barrage of rescue programs to stem the economic fallout from the pandemic.
However, questions remain about how much back and forth may have occurred over policymakers' personal trading in a year when markets first cratered, then rebounded on the basis of both massive federal fiscal stimulus and an aggressive rescue effort by the Fed.
Last week, the Fed, responding to a Freedom of Information Act request by Reuters, said there are about 60 pages of correspondence between its ethics officials and policymakers regarding financial transactions conducted during 2020 but "denied in full" to release the documents, citing exemptions under the information act that it said applied in this case.
Despite the overhaul of limits on trading, at least one lawmaker has called for a Securities and Exchange Commission investigation into Fed officials' trading activity to determine if any trades in the past violated insider trading rules.



US lifts ban on Mexican avocados

(CNN)The United States is resuming its avocado inspection program in Mexico's Michoacán state a week after imposing a temporary ban in response to a US inspector receiving a death threat.
The Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service said Friday that it was working closely with Mexican authorities to enact enhanced safety measures for inspectors working in the fields.
Michoacán is the only state in Mexico authorized to export avocados to the United States, and approximately 80% of its avocados go to US markets.
The state's governor, Alfredo Ramirez Bedolla, said Friday he was pleased with the US government's decision to resume its avocado inspection program.
"With this decision we ensure the export of the fruit and give economic certainty to farmers and laborers," he tweeted.



What is a financial coach and who really needs one?

Want help figuring out how to buy a home or pay down debt? Clueless about budgeting? Just want a second opinion on your decision to retire in a few years or start your own business?
You might find it helpful to consult a financial coach. You may even have free access to one through your employer.
There's a fair chance your company might offer financial coaching -- or will soon -- especially if you work for a large organization. That's because many employers are trying to beef up their benefits in a bid to attract and retain employees.
Currently, 43% of employers say they offer "personalized financial counseling, coaching or planning," and another 35% say they're thinking about doing so, according to research by the Employee Benefit Research Institute in partnership with HR benefits consulting firm Mercer and others.
What does a financial coach do?
Financial coaches can offer guidance on many types of money issues and help you improve your money habits.
The role is part therapist and part financial guide, said Greg Ward, director of the finanical wellness research division of Financial Finesse, a coaching company that primarily serves the employees of Fortune 500 companies.
A coach helps you meet your financial goals by gaining an understanding of your financial situation, money behaviors and personality. They can then provide helpful education and resources, and empower you to make decisions confidently.
"[A coach's job] is to make sure the client understands their financial situation, and how it helps or harms them ... Then help them align their behavior with their financial vision," said Saundra Davis, founder of Sage Financial Solutions, which provides workplace financial coaching through Employee Assistance Programs, and also runs a financial coach certification program.
What coaches don't do is manage your money, make decisions for you or recommend specific investments.
What they might do, however, is help you navigate a set of options for your situation, and alert you to workplace benefits you may not know about. Or a coach might look at the funds in your employer's 401(k) plan, for instance, and indicate which ones best address your risk tolerance and time horizon.
"I'll help you understand what would be appropriate. But I will not say put 10% of your contributions in Fund A," Ward said.
Coaches at Financial Finesse don't sell any products to clients, which could be a potential conflict of interest for the coach, Ward said. For instance, a coach working for an insurance company may suggest one of its insurance products or may work for a 401(k) plan provider and recommend one of that company's IRA products. While the recommendation may be made in good faith, the coach could be blind to their bias. "It is important for [you] to know how the coach is compensated and what potential conflicts of interest may exist."
At Brightside, which serves primarily Fortune 1000 companies, the financial "assistants," as their coaches are called, don't sell products either. But they may research and present a number of potential solutions to address a client's current situation, said CEO Tom Spann.
For instance, that could mean helping them find state-provided subsidies for child care. Or it could mean helping them find a short-term emergency loan at credit card rates rather than predatory loan rates. They could also help arrange for the employee to pay off the loan through their paychecks. If the lender of the chosen loan pays a fee to Brightside, Spann said, the fee is put into a savings account for the client, in what he calls a "kick forward."
Then, when their loan is paid off, the client will have the option to continue putting at least part of what used to be their loan payment into a savings account to help them build a savings habit.
What qualifies someone to be a financial coach?
There's no universal set of requirements that must be met for a person to call themselves a financial coach, but many have related certifications, degrees or experience that help inform the work they do.
At Financial Finesse, for instance, all the coaches are certified financial planners, which means they have to have a bachelor's degree, taken requisite coursework, passed a CFP exam and completed 4,000 or more hours of financial planning work before getting certified.
At Brightside, about a third are CFPs and the rest are a combination of certified financial coaches, social workers or people who come with experience in other financial arenas such as student loans or credit counseling, Spann said.
If your employer does provide financial coaching as a benefit, ask the person you're thinking of working with what qualifies them to be a coach and what areas they specialize in to make sure they will be a good fit for you.
How it works
Coaches aim to have sustained contact with a client over time. But you decide the cadence of the relationship -- whether you want to check in with a coach weekly, monthly or not at all after a few sessions, Ward said.
You also decide how you want to interact with the coach -- whether by phone, email, video call or on the digital app or online platform the coaching company may provide.
Both Ward and Spann said the information clients share with their financial coaches is confidential and will not be shared with their employers. "You can tell us about your gambling addiction. We would never disclose that," Spann said.
It's a judgment-free experience, Ward added. "There's often fear and shame that if I admit I don't know what I'm doing, I'm going to be judged. We're not going to judge a person."



Home prices up 15.4% in January from a year ago

Home prices climbed in January as inventory fell to a new record low.
The median price for a home last month was $350,300, up 15.4% from a year ago, according to the National Association of Realtors. It was not the highest median price on record, which was $362,800 last June, but it is the highest for the month of January, which tends to be a sleepier time for home sales.
"Buyers were likely anticipating further rate increases and locking in at the low rates, and investors added to overall demand with all-cash offers," said Lawrence Yun, NAR's chief economist. "Consequently, housing prices continue to move solidly higher."
Sales of existing homes -- which include single-family homes, townhomes, condominiums and co-ops -- surged 6.7% from December, but were down 2.3% from a year ago, largely because there were so few homes to buy.
At the end of January, the inventory of homes available to buy fell to an all-time low of 860,000, down 16.5% from last year. That's the lowest since NAR began tracking it in 1999. At the current monthly sales pace, supply would last just 1.6 months, which is also a record low.
"The inventory of homes on the market remains woefully depleted," Yun said.
But the availability and affordability of homes depends greatly on price level.
Homes priced at $500,000 and below are disappearing, Yun said, while supply has risen at the higher price range. Such increases will continue to shift the mix of buyers toward high-income consumers and push out first-time homebuyers, he said.
"There are more listings at the upper end -- homes priced above $500,000 -- compared to a year ago, which should lead to less hurried decisions by some buyers," Yun added. "Clearly, more supply is needed at the lower-end of the market in order to achieve more equitable distribution of housing wealth."
Fewer first-time homebuyers, more investors
The share of first-time homebuyers in the market was near all-time lows.
Only 27% of sales in January were to first-time homebuyers, which was down from 33% a year ago.
At the same time, individual investors or second-home buyers bought 22% of homes in January, up from 15% a year ago. More than a quarter of home sales in January were all cash, up from 19% a year ago.
As prospective home buyers seek out greater job opportunities and affordability, Yun said more people are moving to the South and Sunbelt, pushing the number of sales and prices higher there.
Existing home sales in the South jumped 9.3% in January from December. The median price in the region was $312,400, up 18.7% from a year ago. For the fifth straight month, the South had the highest pace of appreciation.
"The migration to the southern states is clearly getting reflected in higher home sales and fast rising home prices compared to other regions," Yun said.
Race against rising mortgage rates
Also creating urgency in the housing market are rising mortgage rates. Last month, homebuyers raced to lock in lower mortgage rates, which have been inching closer to 4%.
Properties were typically on the market for just 19 days in January. That's slightly slower than the record fast pace of 17 days over the summer. But It's faster than a year ago, when homes sold in an average of 21 days. More than three-quarters of homes sold in January 2022 were on the market for less than a month.
Yun said rising mortgage rates are problematic for at least two groups in the market.
"First, some moderate-income buyers who barely qualified for a mortgage when interest rates were lower will now be unable to afford a mortgage," he said. "Second, consumers in expensive markets, such as California and the New York City metro area, will feel the sting of nearly an additional $500 to $1,000 in monthly payments due to rising rates."
But so far, buyer activity has been resilient, said Danielle Hale, Realtor.com's chief economist, even in the face of factors that could additionally squeeze housing budget priorities, including rising rates and inflation.
"Housing market momentum will be tested by rising mortgage rates in 2022," said Hale.
"Our expectation is that we'll continue to see home sales at a relatively high level throughout 2022, as post-pandemic shifts, like rising workplace flexibility, enable would-be buyers to expand their geographic search horizons and find an affordable place to call home," said Hale.



CNN reporter describes the challenges of covering the conflict in Ukraine

New York  (CNN)Covering what's really happening on the Ukrainian border is being made even more difficult because of the constant flow of unverified or potentially misleading information, said Clarissa Ward, CNN's chief international correspondent. The prevalence of amateur videos, crowdsourced content and difficult to discern satellite imagery can confuse or perhaps misinform even seasoned journalists.
The far-eastern region of Ukraine includes breakaway, pro-Russian separatist republics, and residents there have been describing scenes of carnage from shells allegedly fired by the Ukrainian military.
But proof of the shelling is much harder to come by. "We've not seen anything to back that up in any way," Ward said of efforts to verify those reports.
On Friday, Ward viewed a video from one of the separatist leaders claiming there was going to be an imminent attack from the Ukrainian military and including footage of busloads of evacuees.
But when CNN staffers studied the meta data on the video, they realized it was actually recorded earlier in the week.
"The fact that it was prerecorded and then released at a specific time indicates indeed that there's some kind of premeditated plot here," Ward told CNN chief media correspondent Brian Stelter on "Reliable Sources" Sunday. Ward added that similar potentially manufactured scenes are playing out on Russian TV, including footage of tearful elderly women escaping separatist areas.
Some glimpses of what's really happening in the region can be gleaned through social media — including TikTok videos. But journalists are trained to never take any narrative at face value.
"Nowadays, we're having to use so many different tools to go about that verification process," Ward said. "It all makes the job just a little bit more complex."
A CNN team accompanying the Ukrainian interior minister came under mortar fire yesterday. They managed to gather video and then were quickly evacuated by the Ukrainian military, Ward said.
"What you're seeing in the last few days is ... a major uptick, a major escalation," Ward said. "Particularly when you're seeing shells landing on civilian buildings."
Is the news media rooting for war?
Stelter pointed out that many critics on Twitter and other platforms argue that the media is rooting for war.
CNN media analyst David Zurawik said that accusation "outrages" him, especially while seeing journalists covering the conflict from the front lines.
"War is not that great a financial inducement, at least in the television industry," Zurawik said. "A lot of sponsors don't want their product being shown during war."



Facebook is rebranding everything but faces the same old problems

New York (CNN Business)Nearly four months ago, amid a firestorm of critical coverage stemming from a whistleblower's leaks, Facebook shifted its strategic focus to building an immersive version of the internet it calls the "metaverse" and changed its company name to Meta.
This week, the company continued with its rebranding campaign. The News Feed, for years the centerpiece of the Facebook user experience and also central to some of its controversies, was rebranded simply as Feed. Its employees, previously known as Facebookers, became Metamates. And its corporate values got a refresh, too.
Gone are corporate maxims like "be bold." Instead, the company introduced guidelines such as "focus on long-term impact" and "be direct and respect your colleagues." Mark Zuckerberg, the company's cofounder and CEO, said the changes were needed because "we're now a metaverse company, building the future of social connection."
"We've already built products that are useful to billions of people, but in our next chapter we'll focus more on inspiring people as well," Zuckerberg wrote in an explanation of the new value "build awesome things."
The changes this week once again hint at the company's eagerness to turn the page and refocus its employees, and arguably the general public, on a new era of its business — one less tarnished by years of controversy.
Zuckerberg himself appears eager to turn away from some of the recent turmoil, announcing this week that Nick Clegg, formerly Meta's vice president of global affairs and communications, has been promoted to president of global affairs. Clegg's promotion will free up time for Zuckerberg to focus on the company's efforts to build new artificial and virtual reality products, Zuckerberg said.
But despite Zuckerberg's and Meta's apparent effort to "live in the future," as one of its new values dictates, the social media giant still has to wrestle with many of the same old problems that have plagued it for months or, in some cases, years. If anything, some of its challenges only seem to be getting worse.
Meta' (FB)s core advertising business faces threats from other Big Tech giants. Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen has filed two new complaints with the Securities and Exchange Commission over the company's handling of misinformation. And the company continues to grapple with regulatory scrutiny.
"At the end of the day, Mark can run, but he can't hide from the regulatory pressure," Katie Harbath, a Facebook alum who helped lead the company's global election efforts until her departure last year, said of his making Clegg effectively the company's most public face on policy issues.
For a long time, it seemed like Zuckerberg and Facebook could at least find some comfort during the company's various PR crises in the resiliency of its stock. But that's no longer the case. Meta's shares have fallen more than 40% over the past six months, with much of the loss in value following a rough holiday quarter earnings report which showed, among other things, a rare lapse in user growth.
"Wall Street and the investment community [have] caught up with [the fact that] that the core business at Facebook is no longer growing, it may even be in decline at some point, and therefore Facebook has had to make an enormous pivot into a tangential, and really unrelated, space," said Gil Luria, technology strategist at investment firm D.A. Davidson.
Asked for comment about this story, Meta directed CNN Business to Zuckerberg's post about the company's changing values.
Facebook's problems continue
While Meta's announcements this week center on its vision for a new, virtual world, the company's problems continue to pile up in the real world.
On Friday, the Washington Post broke the news that two new whistleblower complaints against Meta were filed with the SEC. Andrew Bakaj, a lawyer for Whistleblower Aid, which filed the complaints, confirmed to CNN Business that they were filed on behalf of Haugen. Haugen is the former Facebook product manager who left the company last May and took with her a trove of internal documents that would later be disclosed to Congress and inform the blockbuster Facebook Papers reporting that fueled the company's prolonged PR crisis.
CNN Business obtained redacted copies of the new SEC complaints as part of a consortium of news organizations from a Congressional source, who also provided the internal documents that formed the basis of last year's Facebook Papers reporting.
The new complaints accuse the company of misleading investors about its efforts to address climate and Covid-19 misinformation on its platforms. They detail how Facebook had repeatedly touted its efforts to fight misinformation about Covid-19 and climate change and allege that internal documents indicate employees were raising concerns at the same time about such content being easily available on the platform and about shortcomings in the company's efforts to address it.
"Some investors simply will not want to invest in a company that fails to adequately address such misinformation," one of the SEC filings states. Haugen previously filed SEC complaints against Facebook related to its handling of misinformation about the 2020 Presidential election and January 6 insurrection, human trafficking on its platforms, the effects of its products on teens and more.
In a statement to CNN Business, Meta spokesperson Drew Pusateri said the company has directed two billion people to authoritative public health information and used its Climate Science Center, available in more than 150 countries to provide reliable information about the climate, while working with independent fact checkers to address and remove false claims. "There are no one-size-fits-all solutions to stopping the spread of misinformation, but we're committed to building new tools and policies to combat it," Pusateri said.
The news of the SEC filings followed a slew of other headlines for the company this week. Meta agreed to pay $90 million to settle a decade-old class action lawsuit over a (now long defunct) practice that allowed the social network to track users' activity across the internet, even if they had logged out of the platform. The agreement, which also involves deleting the data it collected in this manner, is one of the biggest settlements in the company's history. Pusateri on Tuesday said the settlement "is in the best interest of our community and our shareholders and we're glad to move past this issue."
Lawmakers this week also added to the slate of proposed legislation that could affect Meta. Sens. Richard Blumenthal and Marsha Blackburn proposed the Kids Online Safety Act, which would create new responsibilities for tech platforms to protect children from digital harms such as sexual exploitation, and require them to create default settings for families to protect their kids from harmful content.
But perhaps the biggest potential problem for Meta to emerge this week was an announcement by Google that it plans to develop new privacy measures that would remove the ability to track users across apps and limit the sharing of user data with third parties on Android devices.
The announcement comes after a similar move by Apple (AAPL) caused a huge hit to Meta's advertising business by giving users the chance to opt-out of being tracked by apps, thereby making it harder for Facebook to target ads. Meta's ad business is heavily dependent on small businesses "that are relying on the benefits of being able to access a lot of information about users to effectively target advertising ... without those details, advertisers are not going to pay as much money," Third Bridge Group analyst Scott Kessler said. The Apple change is expected to have a $10 billion impact on Meta's bottom line this year.
While Google (GOOG) suggested its new privacy-focused advertising system will work differently from Apple's — and a Meta executive lauded Google's "long-term, collaborative approach" to developing it — the change could still ultimately be yet another blow to Meta's core ad business.
Building out its VR efforts might help. Indeed, Meta's and Zuckerberg's focus on the company's metaverse ambitions may be an acknowledgment of the fact that its existing business is in trouble, Luria said. He noted that Zuckerberg's updates this week may be a way of communicating, both inside the company and externally, "the importance and timeliness of this pivot."
Meta is working to develop its own tech ecosystem that users will be able to access with its own Quest headsets and where it can run its own app stores, without being at the whim of companies like Apple and Google. The problem: the metaverse, and broad adoption of its related technologies by consumers and advertisers, is still years away, so that solution is unlikely to turn Meta's fortunes around anytime soon.
"In the meantime," Luria said, "if their core business is slowing down and will possibly start declining at some point, that will break Facebook's long streak of fast growth that they've had... since they've gone public."



US prosecutors explore racketeering charges in short-seller probe

US prosecutors are exploring whether they can use a federal law originally enacted to take down the mafia in a sprawling probe of hedge funds and research firms that bet against stocks, according to two sources familiar with the situation.
The Justice Department last year issued subpoenas to dozens of firms, including such well-known names as Citron Research and Muddy Waters Research LLC, as part of the sweeping probe focused on potentially manipulative trading around negative reports on listed companies published by some of their investors, Reuters and other media outlets have reported.
Although prosecutors haven't made any decisions yet, potential charges under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) were an option on the table, the sources said.
In the past, prosecutors have built RICO cases alongside other allegations, such as manipulation. One of the most high profile cases brought under the RICO Act included that of Michael Milken, who was indicted in the 1980s for racketeering and securities fraud but reached a plea deal, pleading guilty to securities violations but not racketeering or insider trading.
Reuters could not ascertain which types of charges the agency was leaning toward at this stage of the investigation or whether the probe would eventually lead to charges.
Spokespeople for the Justice Department in Washington and the US attorney's office in Los Angeles, which are involved in the probe according to the sources, declined to comment.
Citron declined to comment.
A spokesperson for Muddy Waters did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The potential use of the 1970 law, which has not been previously reported, provides new insights into the scale and ambition of the investigation. The probe marks a new frontier for the Justice Department's unit in Washington tasked with rooting out corporate crime.
A racketeering case could allow prosecutors to ensnare a broad swathe of investors involved in an alleged "criminal enterprise," even if they participated indirectly, lawyers said.
But such a case would also face more challenges than a narrower one aimed at a smaller group of people. That's in part because prosecutors have to establish a pattern of activity, they said.
Among the activities the Justice Department is investigating is whether funds conspired to perpetrate a so-called "short and distort scheme," sources have previously told Reuters.
In such a scheme the funds would have placed trades that stood to profit if a company's stock fell and then issued false or misleading negative research reports about the company.
Prosecutors are also investigating the relationships between the short-sellers who publish the reports and hedge funds and other investors that may have profited, the sources have said.
They are examining whether there is coordinated trading designed to boost trading volumes and exaggerate price drops on news of the short reports, Reuters previously reported.
RICO charges have historically been used to combat bribery, money laundering or drug trafficking conducted by organized criminal enterprises such as the mafia. They are unusual in the world of finance but not unprecedented.
US prosecutors in 2019 charged then-current and former JPMorgan Chase executives with racketeering and manipulating prices of precious metals.
"RICO statutes haven't been used in this realm often in recent years, but they aren't limited to organized crime," Robert Frenchman of Mukasey Frenchman LLP in New York said. "It's certainly in the prosecutors' toolbox."



Development bank accused of lending millions to companies allegedly linked to forced labor in Xinjiang

(CNN)The International Finance Corporation, one of the world's leading development banks, has for decades touted its success in funding companies it says can help end extreme poverty in developing countries.
But new research suggests the organization, which operates under the World Bank Group, has been providing hundreds of millions of dollars in loans to companies that may be relying on forced labor from Uyghur and other ethnic minority groups in China's western Xinjiang region.
The report, titled "Financing and Genocide: Development Finance and the Crisis in the Uyghur Region," presents evidence that in recent years the IFC has loaned money to four Chinese companies that have been linked to forced labor and land expropriation in the region, along with environmental damage and the destruction of indigenous cultural heritage sites.
According to public disclosures, the four companies named in the report — Chenguang Biotech Group, Camel Group, Century Sunshine and Jointown Pharmaceutical Group — have received loans and equity investments from the IFC valued at $439 million. Including loans sourced from institutional investors via the IFC, that figure rises to around $485 million.
The loans could contravene the IFC's own internal guidelines — known as its Performance Standards — which function entirely to "prevent IFC from financing projects that will have adverse environmental and social impacts that jeopardize [its] development aims," according to the report.
CNN Business was granted exclusive, advance access to the report, which was led by the Helena Kennedy Centre for International Justice at Sheffield Hallam University in the United Kingdom and published by the Atlantic Council, a Washington-based think tank.
The Helena Kennedy Center for International Justice researches modern day slavery, gender-based violence and hate crime and has previously published reports alleging the use of forced labor in Xinjiang to produce cotton and solar panels. They say the four named companies are not the only businesses receiving IFC funds in the region.
"I think it's clear that the IFC needs to divest from all their investments in the Uyghur region," said report author Laura Murphy, a professor in Human Rights and Contemporary Slavery at Sheffield Hallam University, who added that it is "incumbent on the IFC based on their own standards that they ensure that their clients are not involved in forced labor."
In a statement, an IFC spokesperson told CNN the corporation has "strong environment, social and governance (ESG) standards" that are diligently applied during the life of the investment and are considered a model for development finance worldwide.
"We do not tolerate discrimination or forced labor under any circumstances," the spokesperson said. "Whenever such serious allegations are brought to our attention, we work to verify and address them with our clients with urgency."
Beijing responded to the report on Thursday, saying it was "false" and "full of lies and groundless accusations."
"It is understood that the organization has no staff in Xinjiang. There was no field investigation, no real research, no evidence to back up the report," Foreign Ministry spokesperson Wang Wenbin said in a briefing.
"The Chinese government attaches great importance to the protection of human rights and workers' rights and interests. For some time now, certain countries have been hyping up social lies and extending their reach to multilateral development institutions," Wang added.
CNN sought comment from the four Chinese companies named in the report but did not receive a response. The report's authors also said they attempted to contact them but did not receive a response.
'Punished with internment'
Xinjiang has become a geopolitical hotspot because of the breadth of human rights abuses alleged to have taken place in the region, including what some Western governments have called the "genocide" of Uyghurs and other minorities.
The US State Department has estimated that since 2017 up to two million members of religious and ethnic minorities have been imprisoned in a shadowy network of internment camps.
China has described the facilities as "vocational training centers" where people learn job skills, Chinese language and laws, and officials declared in 2019 that such centers  — also aimed at deradicalizing local Muslims — had been closed down. They also claimed that the original detainees had graduated but that people were still enrolling to gain new skills.
Western governments and human rights organizations have alleged that minorities in the region have been subjected to forced labor through job creation schemes run by the Chinese government to achieve "poverty alleviation."
Workers who have participated in those job programs have told CNN that if they did not take the jobs they were offered, for a fraction of the usual rate of pay, they were warned they would be sent to camps.
"The Chinese government has embarked on a massive campaign which they deem to be poverty alleviation," said Murphy of Sheffield Hallam. "These programs are often non-consensual, and people who refuse can be punished with internment."
China has consistently denied all allegations of human rights abuses in Xinjiang and told CNN in a statement prior to publication that claims of forced labor were lies created to smear its reputation.
"China has repeatedly emphasized that the so-called issues of 'forced labor' and 'repression' against ethnic minorities are huge lies concocted by anti-China forces in the US and the West. They are entirely baseless. Such attempts to attack and smear China based on lies and disinformation are bound to fail," the statement said.
Concerns raised about IFC outcomes
Based in Washington, D.C., the IFC describes itself as the "largest global development institution focused on the private sector in developing countries."
It is part of the World Bank Group and says it provided roughly $31.5 billion in loans and other financial assistance — including nearly $12 billion in "fragile, conflict-affected, and poverty-stricken countries" — last fiscal year to private companies and financial institutions in emerging and developing economies around the world.
The IFC spokesperson told CNN its mission is to "fight poverty by helping the private sector thrive." "In doing so, we create jobs and raise living standards, especially for the poor and vulnerable," the spokesperson said.
But its investments have been criticized for years by charities that accuse the IFC of sometimes causing more harm than good by failing to carry out due diligence.
In 2015, Oxfam International published a report compiled with input from several NGOs that claimed the IFC sent billions of dollars in "out of control" investments to third parties that caused "human rights abuses around the world."
IFC said at the time that it was working with its clients to resolve issues raised by Oxfam and other civil society organizations and that it valued any insights into those concerns. The organization also said that it took additional efforts to train its staff and be more selective about its clients and was strengthening oversight and supervision.
The World Bank Group had been acknowledging concerns even prior to that report. In 2013, the organization's Independent Evaluation Group highlighted declining "outcome ratings" for IFC-financed projects and advised the IFC to focus on "supervision" and "enhancing the quality of projects" through "intensified efforts."
CNN approached the World Bank Group for comment about the Helena Kennedy Centre's findings, and a spokesperson directed CNN to the IFC's response.
Alleged connections to forced labor
The four Chinese companies with ties to Xinjiang named in the Helena Kennedy Centre report work in sectors ranging from food to pharmaceuticals and energy. Using corporate documents, stock exchange filings, Chinese state media reports, IFC disclosures and satellite imagery, the report claims these companies have ties to parts of the region where allegations of forced labor are rampant.
In some cases, the report says these companies have participated in state-endorsed "labor transfer" or "poverty alleviation" schemes, which international human rights organizations and foreign governments have for years claimed perpetuate forced labor in the region.
CNN has independently verified that the four companies named in the Helena Kennedy Centre report have all received loans from the IFC in recent years. At least two of those loans, made to Camel Group and Jointown Pharmaceutical, have been used to finance projects in Xinjiang. Because the firms are all publicly traded on Chinese stock exchanges, corporate filings detail some of their dealings in the region. Chinese state media reports also explain some of their work, while the IFC's own records shed some light on the organization's involvement in providing financing to these firms.
One company, Chenguang Biotech Group, makes food additives, natural dyes and pigments, and sources its raw materials primarily from India and Xinjiang. In Xinjiang, the company is involved in the production of marigolds.
The IFC, which loaned Chenguang $40 million in 2019 so the company could increase production, conducted an assessment that found the company's risk of being implicated in forced labor with respect to marigold growers to be "low" and that overall "the risks in Chenguang's primary supply chain are low to medium."
But according to the Helena Kennedy Centre report, Chenguang sources some of its workforce from "coercive" state-sponsored labor and land transfer programs.
The report claims that in some cases farmers have no say in whether to participate in major farming projects, or what they want to plant. Companies, too, are under pressure to support state programs.
Citing an official press release, the report said that, in one case, the paramilitary organization Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps (XPCC), which controls the region economically and politically, conducted "ideological work" on those who expressed reluctance about changing their farming methods, which the report described as a method of "coercing" minorities.
Those people are encouraged by government agencies to "relinquish their land, change their crops, alter their farming methods, work for cooperatives or large-scale farms that have expropriated their lands, or move to factory labor," the report said.
Another company, the battery maker Camel Group, received nearly $36 million in funding from the IFC in July 2019 to expand its battery recycling operations in parts of China, including Xinjiang, according to IFC documents. Chinese corporate records also show the company has at least two subsidiaries in the region.
An IFC risk assessment did acknowledge "potentially significant adverse environmental or societal risks" on account of smelting waste lead but added that Camel promised the organization it would promote the hiring of more local minority residents in Xinjiang.  IFC also assessed that "no forced labor practices" are used by Camel Group and that its battery suppliers are subject to quarterly audits by the company to ensure they are complaint with child and forced labor inspections.
However, the Helena Kennedy Centre report cited government press releases that it says show Camel has benefited from state-sponsored labor transfer programs. In July 2017, according to one government release, 165 laborers were taken across Xinjiang for a 10-day long "closed pre-job training," which the report authors say was an indication that their movements were restricted.
During that time, according to a government press release, the participants received "military and ideological training," and "were required to sing patriotic songs" and learn Mandarin Chinese — measures that human rights organizations worry can lead to the erasure of culture for Uyghurs, ethnic Kazakhs and Kyrgyz in Xinjiang. Those groups speak languages closer to Turkish than Mandarin Chinese.
Before the laborers were dispatched to their assigned companies — one of which was Camel — they were made to attend a flag-raising ceremony, affirm their loyalty to the ruling Chinese Communist Party and pledge to "make due contributions to national security, national unity, social stability and harmony," according to the government press release.
A third company, the fertilizer and materials firm Century Sunshine Group, received $165 million from the IFC between 2014 and 2016, according to IFC documents.  That figure includes $125 million to upgrade a fertilizer manufacturing facility in Jiangsu province, north of Shanghai on China's eastern coast. As of December 2020, IFC had roughly a 17% stake in the company, according to an annual report from Century Sunshine.
Century Sunshine also has ties to Xinjiang. The report cited local state-run media from December 2017 that said the company's Xinjiang subsidiary took in 10 rural laborers from a township in eastern Xinjiang through state-sponsored labor transfer programs. Two years later, that same subsidiary was one of nine firms that participated in a state-backed labor recruitment event that encouraged off-season farmers to work for industrial manufacturing facilities in the area — an event involving labor transfer the report's authors said was at "high risk"of violating standards for labor and working conditions.
The final company implicated in the report, Jointown Pharmaceutical, received nearly $200 million in debt financing from the IFC in the last few years, according to IFC documents. IFC assessed their investments in Jointown Pharmaceutical as having "limited" environmental or social risks.
The company — which distributes personal protection equipment, medical devices and pharmaceutical drugs — received nearly $150 million in July 2019 to build distribution centers and upgrade four warehouses in middle and western China, including Xinjiang. In October 2020, Jointown Pharmaceutical received another $50 million to buy pharmaceutical products and expand distribution because of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Like Camel and Century Sunshine, the Helena Kennedy Centre report alleges that Jointown Pharmaceutical has participated in Xinjiang-related labor transfer programs. The report cited an article published in December 2020 by the Xinjiang Food and Drug Administration on its official WeChat account that said Jointown Pharmaceutical acknowledged receiving "more than 200" workers "transferred" from southern Xinjiang and other remote and underdeveloped prefectures through the labor programs.
The report also said that Jointown Pharmaceutical has "many" facilities in Xinjiang that are located next to buildings identified as internment camps by the Australian Strategy Policy Institute, a Canberra-based think tank. One of Jointown Pharmaceutical's facilities in the regional capital of Urumqi, for example, is in one of the city's "largest prison districts," according to the report.
Efforts to monitor investments in Xinjiang
While travel to Xinjiang by foreign organizations has become almost impossible in recent years, the Helena Kennedy Centre report says the IFC paid a one-day visit to the region in 2019, during the height of the government crackdown there.
Report co-author Kendyl Salcito, the Executive Director of human rights research non-profit NomoGaia, told CNN she spoke via phone to an IFC representative who went on the trip. The employee told Salcito that their group was temporarily detained by police three times within a roughly 24-hour period, adding that the atmosphere was very uncomfortable and they wanted to leave quickly.
The IFC continued to fund projects in the region after that visit, as seen in IFC documents reviewed by the report authors and by CNN. In November 2020, Salcito said, the IFC told her that it did not have alternative arrangements for monitoring projects there.
The IFC did not respond to CNN's questions about Salcito's account of the trip. However, the spokesperson told CNN that in the last two years the IFC has dedicated more resources to supervising companies it works with in Xinjiang.
"While accessing projects on the ground has been more difficult for all development actors in the last two years due to the Covid-19 pandemic and travel restrictions, IFC has dedicated more resources to supervising the companies we work with regarding adherence to our ESG standards. These standards are legally binding, include protections for workers, communities, and the environment, and expressly prohibit discrimination and the use of forced labor," the spokesperson said.
The IFC has taken some steps to withdraw from the region. It ceased its relationships with three other Chinese firms that "were engaged or sourcing from companies engaged in repression in the Uyghur Region," according to the report.
The IFC did not respond to CNN's questions about why it chose to divest those companies and not others.
In 2020, the IFC told Salcito in email exchanges viewed by CNN that the Chinese companies it works with assured the organization they did not use any forced labor. The IFC did not respond to CNN's questions about that correspondence. The Helena Kennedy Centre report authors say that form of self-reporting is wholly insufficient.
"The continued willingness to provide financing in the region, without any direct oversight, indicates that its investment strategy in the region continues to overlook the ongoing crimes against humanity and Performance Standards violations that render the IFC's investments complicit," the report said.
A lack of due diligence
Multinational corporations have for years found it difficult to perform due diligence on their supply chains linked to Xinjiang because of limited access, surveillance and the threat of government interference. That makes the use of publicly available records and satellite imagery all the more important in determining whether a firm has ties to forced labor in the region.
Satellite images, for example, have shown that detention facilities are often built up simultaneously alongside factories and business parks, which human rights activists say is a clear indication that factory workers are being drawn from the prison or camp population.
Some companies, investors and other organizations have pulled out of the region because of the difficulties in auditing activity there. Many international auditors will no longer certify products made in Xinjiang, and the Fair Labor Association —  a Washington-based non-profit whose members include multinational corporations and Ivy League universities — has banned its members from sourcing from Xinjiang due to an inability to gather accurate information, or to verify if workers there are under duress.
"The underlying problem in the Uyghur region is the political repression is so great, we're of the view that no company can do adequate human rights due diligence," said Sophie Richardson, China Director of Human Rights Watch. "Where  [a company] can't do adequate human rights due diligence, it should withdraw."
Foreign governments have also been piling pressure on companies. In December, US President Joe Biden signed into law new rules that will effectively ban imports of products made in Xinjiang.
Washington is also leading a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics, which conclude Sunday. In December, White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki said that the United States would not continue do "business as usual" and participate in the "fanfare" of the Games because of the "ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity in Xinjiang."
But activists also point out that governments that work with the IFC should also review their funding plans. The United States, after all, has plowed more than $23 billion over the last 20 years into the World Bank Group, and as of June 2021 was the largest IFC shareholder with a stake of about 21%.
That funding has increased during the pandemic: In March 2020, the World Bank Group announced that the US government authorized a $5.5 billion capital increase for the IFC as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
In a statement to CNN, the US Treasury Department said that it "works closely with other parts of the United States government to strongly condemn and respond to the atrocities taking place in Xinjiang."
It said the government had pressed multilateral development banks (MDBs) — including the IFC — to strengthen their safeguards so projects "do not inadvertently support companies that participate in or benefit from forced labor."
The statement added: "The US has been — and will continue to be -— a lead voice on this issue in all the MDBs and will continue working with other shareholder countries to make companies with alleged linkages to forced labor practices ineligible for MDB investments."



Snapchat launches a real-time location sharing feature

New York  (CNN)Snapchat on Friday announced a buddy system-like feature that allows its users to share their real-time location with friends for a period of time.
The safety feature is being rolled out as more people are returning to school campuses, traveling, going out on dates and otherwise resuming what they did before the pandemic, the company said. The feature, which is similar to Apple (AAPL)'s Find My app, allows users to share their real-time locations with a friend for 15 minutes, one hour or up to eight hours.
Snapchat partnered with It's On Us, a nonprofit founded in 2014 to combat sexual assault on campuses, in creating the feature.
Since 2017, Snapchat has allowed users to share their locations with friends on its Snap Map feature, which updates a location only when the user has the app open. The company said 250 million users utilize Snap Map each month.
Last May, Snapchat said it reached 500 million monthly active users. According to a survey conducted by the company, 78% of its US app users wouldn't hesitate to share their locations on Snap Map, and most do it as a safe way to connect to others.
Like the Snap Map, the new feature will remain off by default. Snapchatters can turn on their location "in an instant," the company said, but only with specific friends. To reduce the risk of stalking, the company has limited the amount of time and with whom Snapchatters can share their instant location.
Snapchatters can start using the feature by going to a friend's profile and tapping on a new option that allows for live sharing. The app provides an pop-up PSA that advises users that the feature should be shared only with trusted friends and family.
The company also announced this week that Snapchatters can change their usernames starting at the end of February -- a feature previously unavailable in the US.



How cryptocurrencies could trigger a financial crisis

London (CNN Business)Gone are the days when bitcoin, ether and other cryptocurrencies could be thought of as a niche corner of financial markets.
What's happening: In a new report, the Financial Stability Board — an international body that brings together regulators from 24 countries and jurisdictions — said that the "fast evolving" crypto market could quickly reach a point where it becomes a "threat to global financial stability" due to its size, structural vulnerabilities and growing ties to the traditional financial system.
"Financial stability risks could rapidly escalate," the group said this week, adding that policymakers needed to step up.
The assessment comes as banks and other big market players ramp up their exposure to crypto due to requests from clients, despite its volatility.
On Thursday, bitcoin plunged almost 8% as the broader market sold off. The same day, Sequoia Capital said it was ramping up its crypto business with a new $500 million to $600 million fund. The venture capital giant said it would be "focused primarily on liquid tokens and digital assets."
"Systemically important banks and other financial institutions are increasingly willing to undertake activities in, and gain exposures to, crypto-assets," the FSB said. "If the current trajectory of growth in scale and interconnectedness of crypto-assets to these institutions were to continue, this could have implications for global financial stability."
The state of play: In 2021, the market for crypto-assets at one point more than tripled to $2.6 trillion. That's still relatively small. Global stock markets, for comparison, were last valued at more than $120 trillion.
Why, then, is the FSB sounding the alarm? The group said that because big players are getting involved, significant swings in the crypto market could trigger a series of unexpected events. It even drew a comparison to trades tied to the housing market which helped unleash the 2008 financial crisis.
"As in the case of the US subprime mortgage crisis, a small amount of known exposure does not necessarily mean a small amount of risk, particularly if there [is] a lack of transparency and insufficient regulatory coverage," the FSB wrote.
Watch this space: After a slow start, governments could begin to get more aggressive. Yahoo! News reported Thursday that US President Joe Biden could issue an executive order next week instructing agencies to study crypto and develop a government-wide strategy to regulate digital assets.
Earlier this month, Congress held a hearing on the regulation of stablecoins. These are digital assets whose value is pegged to other currencies or commodities.
But UBS doesn't think investors should hold their breath for clearer guidance from lawmakers any time soon.
"Regulators could be waiting a long time for Congressional action and in the meantime will need to grapple with these issues using the limited and imperfect authorities they already have," the Swiss bank said last week.
Investors nervously eye the Ukrainian border
Global markets stabilized on Friday after the threat of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine propelled the Dow to its worst day of 2022.
But uncertainty over what will happen next — and what it could mean for investors — is lingering.
The latest: Biden said Thursday he believes an invasion of Ukraine could happen "within the next several days," while his administration's top diplomat warned that Russia has not withdrawn troops, despite Moscow's claims.
The developments helped send the Dow down 1.8%, while the S&P 500 dropped 2.1% and the Nasdaq Composite shed 2.9%.
"Investors, wary of any bad news, have been unable to maintain positive momentum in equity markets across the globe as geopolitical risks dominate headlines," said Peter Essele, head of portfolio management for Commonwealth Financial Network.
He added that "a further escalation of tensions in the near term could roil markets," which are already on edge about kinks in the global supply chain as the Federal Reserve prepares to hike interest rates for the first time in years.
On the radar: The price of gold rose 1.5% on Thursday, though it's pulled back slightly on Friday. It's now trading near $1,890, just below its highest level since June.
The yellow metal, a common safe-haven investment, is getting a lift from uncertainty about the situation in Ukraine, along with anxiety about rising inflation that can trigger a rush for physical assets.
Will New York City's offices ever be full again?
New York City Mayor Eric Adams made a call to workers this week: Head back into the office. Please.
Adams said at a press conference that in America's biggest city, return-to-office progress peaked at over 35% in early December but crashed to just over 10% by January as fears about the Omicron variant rose. It "still has not recovered," he said.
Why it matters: "When employees don't return to work, they don't eat lunch at a nearby restaurant, shop at a local store or take their clothes to the dry cleaners," Adams said. "Our business districts suffer, and it slows the recovery."
He added that because of remote work, office vacancy rates are at a 40-year high — equivalent to more than 83 million square feet of empty space.
But Adams probably shouldn't hold his breath for workers to go back to the routines they had before the pandemic.
According to a Pew survey released this week, 59% of Americans with jobs that can be done remotely say they're still working from home much or all of the time. Before Covid-19, that number was 23%.
And crucially, 60% of workers with jobs that can be done from home say they'd like to work from home all or most of the time when the pandemic is over, if given the choice. That's up from 54% in 2020.
The biggest reason cited? It's just their preference now.
Up next
Bloomin' Brands (BLMN), DraftKings and Deere (DE) report results before US markets open.
Also today: Existing home sales for January arrive at 10 a.m. ET.
Coming next week: It's time for retail earnings. Results are due from Macy's (M), Home Depot (HD), Lowe's (LOW), Bath & Body Works and TJX (TJX).



Here's what workers really want from their employers

It's no surprise that anyone looking to quit their current job for a new one will want a position that offers better pay and work-life balance.
But what may be surprising is just how much more motivating these issues are in a person's decision to switch jobs today than they were a few years ago, according to a new Gallup study of more than 13,000 US employees. The last time Gallup did a similar survey was 2015.
Employers serious about winning the war for talent in the next year or so should view the following six factors as the baseline expectations of potential hires, and should aim to satisfy these conditions when trying to lure -- or keep -- great employees.
"A convincing job offer ... will likely need to address most of these attributes when selling (and reselling) people on your workplace," said Ben Wigert, Gallup's director of workplace management research and strategy in a report on the survey's results.
In order of importance, employees said that if they were to look for a job today they would prioritize:
1. Compensation: The study found the No. 1 factor respondents said they would want in a new position is a "significant increase in income or benefits," which 64% cited as very important. That's up from 41% in 2015, when "income or benefits" ranked fourth on their priority list.
"One key reason for this shift is employees are aware they are in a job seeker's market now," Wigert said.
2. Work-life balance: The category "work-life balance and well-being" also has risen in importance -- with 61% of respondents today saying these factors are "very important" versus 53% in 2015.
"Even for workers who aren't experiencing burnout, the significant increase in remote work has raised awareness about the value of job flexibility options -- options that are largely here to stay," Wigert noted.
3. Chance to play to their strengths: 58% of respondents said it was important for them to find a role that "lets them do what they do best."
"Recruiters should make the extra effort to understand what really excites a candidate about their work. Recruiters should also give them a realistic job preview -- what the daily routine is going to feel like, who they are going to be working with, and what they will be expected to do," Wigert recommended.
4. Job security: Some things never change. The same percentage of respondents (53%) today as in 2015 said they would seek job security and stability if they were to switch jobs.
Given the crazy instability individuals, employers and industries have experienced during the pandemic, it's tough to know exactly how broadly stability is defined by job seekers these days.
But, Wigert noted, "after two years of living with daily uncertainties about our health, economy, and what we want our jobs to look like going forward, it's important for employers to show up as a stabilizing force employees can count on through thick and thin."
5. Vaccination policies that align with job seekers' beliefs: Good luck with this one, since there can be quite a stark dichotomy in beliefs over vaccine mandates.
Nevertheless, 43% of respondents said it was important that a new employer have Covid policies that align with their own views. Gallup notes the survey was conducted before the Supreme Court struck down President Biden's federal vaccination mandate.
6. Diversity and inclusiveness: There is no direct comparison to 2015 on how important the issue of diversity and inclusion is for job seekers since it was not an option included in the earlier survey. But this time, 42% of people cited it as very important.
Employees want real change, not platitudes, when it comes to a company's ongoing commitment to diversify its workforce and leadership and to create a culture of inclusion for everyone, Wigert said. "Recruiters must be prepared to discuss those changes and commitments."
Tailor your approach
While the six factors listed here are generally important to all US job seekers these days, some may be more important than others depending on a job seeker's industry, skills or location.
So Wigert recommends that employers pay attention to what their highest performing talent likes about working at the organization -- or what they'd like more of -- to inform how they present what the company has to offer potential hires.
"Now is the time to look within your organization and ask: Are your most important job candidates buying what you're selling?"
The Gallup survey was conducted between Oct. 16 and 28, 2021. The 13,085 respondents were a random, nationally representative group of full-time and part-time employees aged 18 or older. The margin of sampling error was plus or minus 1 percentage point at the 95% confidence level.



Here's why a whole group of men is being overlooked in the workforce

New York (CNN Business)The labor shortage has been a defining feature of the pandemic job market and it's not getting better any time soon. But there is a whole group of workers who are being overlooked even though they could be part of the solution.
Criminal records are keeping certain workers from finding good jobs. This is particularly true of men in their 30s.
More than half of that group has a history of criminal conviction or arrest that keeps them from fully participating in the labor market, a study from nonprofit research group RAND Corporation released Friday found. As of January, just over one million men between the ages of 24 and 35 were counted as unemployed, the biggest group of jobless males, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
By 35, some 64% of unemployed men have been arrested, and about 46% have been convicted of a crime, according to the study. Nearly a third of American adults have been arrested at least once, a far higher level than in comparable Western European countries.
"Employers need to understand that one big reason they cannot find the workers they need is too often they exclude those who have had involvement with the criminal justice system," said Shawn Bushway, the study's lead author and a senior policy researcher at RAND.
"Most employers believe that most people with criminal histories will commit offenses again. But that is not the case," Bushway said. "And the risk of re-offending drops dramatically as people spend more time free in the community without a new conviction. Employers need to adopt a more-nuanced approach to the issue."
One complication is that the severity of the crime is not taken into consideration. If businesses draw the line at any criminal record, applicants arrested for a minor offense, such as possession of marijuana, get lumped in with applicants with more serious convictions like a series of assaults.
Some convictions might disqualify a candidate from a certain job — for example, a person convicted of violent crimes might not be permitted to drive a school bus. But there are many Americans convicted of drug offenses concerning substances that have since been decriminalized in some states. Yet, their records still exist.
Discrimination against people with criminal records isn't new. A recent study from the Census Bureau looking at unemployment and criminal histories around the time of the Great Recession found that workers with felony convictions were some 10 percentage points less likely to be employed compared with peers without records. Workers released from prison were even less likely than their peers to find a job.
Policy efforts like Ban the Box that stop companies from asking about criminal histories on applications don't really solve the problem either because it's easy to check records through publicly available commercial databases, according to RAND.
Leaving workers behind
The issue of finding workers has taken on more urgency in recent months, as the pandemic has left America with nearly 11 million open jobs and nowhere near that number of people to fill them. Covid has led many workers to leave the workforce early, hold out for better working conditions, or remain at home to care for family members and avoid exposure to the virus. There are currently only 58 unemployed workers for every 100 open positions, according to ZipRecruiter.
Without a more concerted effort to reintegrate workers with criminal histories into the labor force, employers are losing out on a big pool of willing workers.
Among unemployed men aged 30 to 38 in 2017, the majority had been arrested at least once, while nearly 40% had been convicted at least once. More than 20% of the group had been imprisoned.
On top of that come the racial disparities in America's criminal justice system. In the studied group, it was 33% more common for Black men -- both employed and unemployed -- to have been arrested compared with White men at every age from 18 to 35. Hispanic men also had higher rates of arrest, conviction and incarceration compared with White men.
Higher rates of criminal histories paired with racism and discrimination in the labor market put these workers at a severe disadvantage.
This is also notable because the number of jobs for men without a college degree has changed significantly since the mid-20th century, especially with the advent of globalization in the manufacturing industry. America's transition from a manufacturing to a services economy has meant fewer well-paid blue collar jobs
Government programs that focus on workplace training and building skills for the unemployed are missing the point in a big way, according to Bushway.
"The unemployment system almost never looks at the role that criminal history plays in keeping people out of the workforce," she said.



Sticker shock: 80% of car buyers now paying above suggested retail price

New York (CNN Business)Only a year ago almost no one paid the full sticker price when buying a new car. Now you're lucky if you can.
In perhaps the most striking sign of the change in new car pricing, 80% of new car buyers in January paid more than manufacturer's suggested retail price, or MSRP, according to data from Edmunds, the online site that tracks car rankings and prices. That's what's commonly known as sticker price.
It's the latest manifestation of the fact that a shortage of parts, especially computer chips, has caused automakers to temporarily halt production at various plants. That has left dealers with fewer vehicles than they need to meet customer demand.
That has resulted the average transaction price hitting $45,717 in January, or $728 above MSRP.
It's up nearly $6,000, or 15%, from January a year ago, and about $7,500 higher than the average price paid in January 2020, just before the pandemic started roiling the auto industry.
Only 2% of buyers paid above MSRP a year ago, with buyers paying on average about $2,150 less than sticker at that time.
"Demand is through the roof, and supplies are historically tight," said Ivan Drury, senior manager of insights for Edmunds. He said if a buyer isn't willing to pay above the sticker price, the dealer can be confident there will soon be another buyer who will.
"We're talking only a 10- to 11-day average for the time vehicles are on the lot," he said. "We've never seen that."
Part of the increase in pricing is because consumers are increasingly buying more SUVs and pickups and fewer sedans, which are typically less expensive. They're also choosing more expensive options, such as automatic braking and lane departure warnings that are designed to make the cars safer.
But the biggest factor behind the price increases is the shortage of cars.
The only good news for car buyers is that used car prices are going up even faster than new car prices, due to an even tighter supply of vehicles in that market. The average value of a trade-in has increased $8,000 in the last year, according to Edmunds.
Dealers are the big winners
The biggest winners from the current prices: auto dealers, and not the automakers. Until Tesla came along with its company-owned stores and direct sales to consumers, all automakers used a network of independent businesses to sell cars to American buyers. Dealers would buy cars wholesale at set prices from automakers. The price paid by consumers were then negotiated with the dealer.
So while automakers benefit from not having to offer some of the cash-back offers or other incentives to boost demand, the auto dealers are reporting booming profits that come from the higher prices.
AutoNation (AN), the nation's largest car dealership, just reported record quarterly and annual profits Thursday, even though it sold only 2% of the new cars above MSRP in 2021. It did so by selling cars at or near sticker price far more often than in the past.
But many car buyers are upset with the idea of paying over sticker price. And their worries are causing concern among some of the automakers themselves.
Both General Motors (GM) and Ford (F) have sent letters to their dealers telling them that they could have their allocation of new vehicles reduced and redirected to other dealers if it's determined they're engaged in what the automakers consider abusive practices.
In particular, GM and Ford are concerned that customers who have put down a deposit for a reservation for upcoming models, particularly EV models like the Ford F-150 Lightning, are being told that they must pay thousands above the list price they expected to pay. Nearly 200,000 Ford customers made deposits for a Lightning, for example, and GM has similar reservation list for some of its recent and upcoming EVs, such as the GMC Hummer EV pickup and the Cadillac Lyriq.
"It has come to our attention that in connection with some of these announcements and launches, a small number of dealers have engaged in practices that do not support a positive sales experience for our customers," said a letter that Steve Carlisle, president of GM North America, sent to dealers. "Specifically, it has come to our attention that some dealerships have attempted to demand money above and beyond the reservation amounts set in GM's program rules and/or have requested customers to pay sums far in excess of MSRP in order to purchase or lease a vehicle."
Ford spokesperson Said Deep said that Ford has notified dealers about similar concerns surrounding the Lightning, which is due to start production in the spring; customers with reservations could start completing their orders starting on January 4. He added that the company also is looking at the large premiums for other hot models, including the Mustang Mach-E and the Bronco, a gasoline powered car.
But neither automaker said they are outright prohibiting the widespread use of charging over list price by dealers, only when the price is "far in excess" of that benchmark.
AutoNation CEO Michael Manley, who was previously CEO of Fiat Chrysler before it merged with France's PSA Group to form Stellantis, said he didn't believe pricing over sticker is a problem for the industry's reputation. He says prices should be close to the MSRP, and he hopes and expects prices to be closer to that level even once the supply of vehicles is no longer constrained.
"The levels of profitability for both [automaker] and dealers clearly show the benefits of selling vehicles at MSRP. And what a concept, right? Selling at MSRP," he said to investors. "I think it's equally clear that significant discounting and high incentives can also damage a brand, which is another reason for our industry to balance appropriately supply and demand."
If he's right, that means the days of paying thousands below sticker are over.
Paying over MSRP is not going away any time soon, according to Drury, of Edmunds. With projections that supply of vehicles could remain tight into the second half of this year, it could be 2023 before paying over sticker price becomes rare once again.



